
* as how powerful an agent is goes up (or like realistically in our case as it will go up, hypothetically), is there a transition from pattern-executor to an optimizer (i.e. sth that tiles with patterns, or maybe does search, or sth like that) and can we characterize what this is like (e.g. continuous, sort of sharp, etc.)? what happens mechanistically for goal creation as this happens — how do the goals depend on the patterns, if at all? how much of a free variable are the goals? what set are the goals sampled from?
less important subquestion: why would this happen at around humans? because models should just copy when still below us in compute? why are we currently in a place where some humans are on one side and some are on another?

* assuming that story is correct, when we get to a goaly level of intelligence, should we expect the model to then already e.g. have situational awareness? (the reason i'm asking i guess it would sort of need to to become deceptive? or maybe not, see nate's deep deception post i guess? hmm would need to think more) does it then also quickly gain situational awareness? it understands stuff and gets goals all at once, because having goals lets you have deep understanding?
* related: what's the relation between terminal and instrumental goals here? like to understand (i.e. as above), ok maybe need instrumental goal pursuit executions, but why need terminal goals / why is that the same? could we just have systems that spin up a bunch of small instrumental goal executions without terminally becoming tilers? is the issue there that there is another alignment problem? (it doesn't feel much like that when spinning up my instrumental goals)

