
say you have a picture with a square and a circle of the same (complicated) color. you'd want to put the color at the union of the pixels in these two. i think there's a major issue here assuming the probability table convention. there are the following two options, and both are bad:
1. the union of the square and the circle is just a generic set of its size from the point of view of the probability tables — like, you can't say in the top latent that latents which correspond to pixels with a nice geometry are more likely to be nonzero, because this isn't something you see in the latent. let's say the union of the square and circle covers half the pixels. let's say the top latent just knows something will appear in one of the n/2 size latents, not knowing which one. then the right probability tables to give will make you pay about n-o(n) bits for where the latent in fact appears, which is a lot compared to all other string lengths. this seems really bad. for most losses, it will be better to put the color at the top in this case, and to say at each pixel which color it wants... intuitively i think it should be possible for the top latent to know that some latents of size n/2 are geometrically nicer than others, and so more likely to have nontrivial latents than others
2. or we can try to somehow make the union of the square and the circle a non-generic latent. i think this will have the problem that then you'll already know what a square is and what a circle is at that latent or its index or something, and you won't be specifying squareness/circleness where the square/circle respectively actually appear. this seems really bad also  


# thoughts on how to fix this

* maybe we want each latent to have to say which pixels it attaches to? and the pixels are to be specified by their x,y coordinate? when reconstructing at some given x,y, you pull all the programs whose set this x,y is in? like, each program is required to have the structure of specifying a set it applies to and then also specifying some stuff in there. this is reminiscent of the geometrical pattern vs value pattern distinction from mumford's pattern theory
* thinking about a picture of stuff in 3d space, i guess maybe there should be a special top latent which can be used when generating the index sets? eg you want to be able to say "this latent applies to a cube here" in one latent and then use the top latent which tells you the orientation of the picture to get the (x,y) pixel coordinate set corresponding to the cube
	* maybe more generally, the latents could form a rooted tree, with higher latents being usable when generating index sets of lower ones?