
* how do the situations (ground variables) get made? is there some story for building concepts from nothing here? one issue is that if you just have 0 or 1 at each ground variable, then you can't do anything interesting. but maybe if you give coordinates at the singletons for free (when dealing with a picture), then you can already get started. in general, what should be given for free at the ground variables? could we tell a story where eg space has to be discovered first somehow?
* why is which concepts to use in a situation something granted for free (which is the case since we can just pick which subset to put a concept in)? shouldn't this be decided live, or shouldn't one at least have to compute which concepts to use, and shouldn't this computational cost be part of the loss? couldn't we see a situation eg in terms of some context (perhaps including that situation itself, or even consisting just of itself maybe as an interesting case) which is supposed to tell us which concepts we should use to handle it (ie, we can decide from the context which concepts to use)
* what about the case where you've defined some tasks for yourself? you probably want a different way to measure success — your strings now have to satisfy some criteria. this is not just about getting close to the right thing! example: want to produce proofs of a bunch of theorems — don't care about proofs being any particular way except that they are indeed proofs of that theorem. can still maybe make sense of algorithmic condensation here. also imo the metric is important even when real numbers are involved?
* generally, our concepts are supposed to help us do various things, not just think
* further, our concepts are also often purposive. eg:
	* a door is a thing connecting two "rooms" that can be opened and closed
	* a pen is a thing one can use to write in ink
	* a computer is a thing one can run programs on
	* these notions are defined more by purpose/function than eg structure or design. one wouldn’t want to be like generating 3d models of these together at all!
* thinking really happens in terms of concepts — they play roles in thinking. how? how does a concept do the work that it does? you could say it's some sort of program or some sort of data... but that doesn't seem like much progress away from the naive starting point of "your understanding is a program that prints out an observation sequence"
	* like, i want a theory of concepts to see that my concept of a ball can get used in various circumstances. i want it to give an account of how it gets used
	* when you are solving a difficult-for-you physics olympiad problem and typing out your chain of thought, you can probably see a bunch of questions being asked to get to a solid model of the situation. it'd be nice to have an account of that. ok, maybe it isn't strictly necessary that a theory of concepts itself have an account of the questioning process here, but it should have an account of how a model can get assembled (presumably from concepts)
* what does condensation look like for mathematical concepts?
	* example: you want to show that there is an antipodal point pair on earth with equal pressures and temperatures. you introduce all sorts of algebraic topology machinery to do this. was most of this there in the world already lol? was it necessary at all?
* there are many criteria on good concepts. different situations place different criteria on your concepts
* science really focuses on making very specific/sparse predictions; like, we find some property that we can make sense of in some contexts and figure out what’s going on with it there. and then we use that for making things. eg electricity stuff makes sense for electric circuits with very particular measurements only. whenever we have a model of something, it really only speaks of very specific aspects of a real thing. where do the specific things get selected in condensation?
* a limitation of the objectivity theorem: in reality, different people often recognize the same thing in different ways. let's spell out the objection a bit more. let's suppose that eg recognition of an object via vision has something to do with noting a pattern in what is perceived; taking something like a condensation view, we could hypothesize this involves reconstruction of some relevant aspect of what is perceived. but two people could recognize the same thing by reconstructing entirely different aspects of it (e.g., one person could recognize a police car as some red-white-blue blob, and another could recognize it as an object with the word "police" written on its side), with one person's reconstructed aspect knowing little about the other person's reconstructed aspect. the same thing can make itself felt in very many different ways, and broad recognition of some gunk as a thing probably relies on that to some extent
