sometimes one gets a new concept where there wasn't one before. sometimes a kinda-new concept is just an old concept after a step of development, eg having become more precise or more general or just having drifted some in meaning. we will consider all of these cases to be valid ways to get a "new" concept — we won't just be looking at things which are radically new

* prelude: I generally like the idea that good concepts are concepts that make a bunch of useful inferences easy. For instance, a continuous function has a maximum on any closed interval, and satisfies the intermediate value property, and has a well-defined integral — these are potentially useful properties you know of something if you know it is a continuous function. And there are also lots of ways you can know something is a continuous function: a composition of continuous functions is continuous, and products and linear combinations of continuous functions are continuous, and polynomials and exponentials and trigonometric functions are continuous, and the integral of a continuous function is continuous, and the uniform limit of a sequence of continuous functions is continuous. The fact that there are lots of inferences from other properties to continuity and from continuity to other properties means that having the notion of continuity in your conceptual vocabulary opens up a lot of easy inferences for you. I think continuity is a good concept largely by virtue of this. One can tell a similar story about the notion of diamond.
  
  Motivated by this, perhaps one can guess that there is a new useful concept to be invented/discovered when one notices that one's graph of allowed inferences has a complete bipartite subgraph which is not already explained by a concept. Like, when one has a bunch of interesting properties $A_1, A_2,\ldots,A_n$ with a bunch of the $n\times m$ pairwise inferences to the interesting properties $B_1, B_2, \ldots, B_m$ already considered valid, then maybe one should investigate if these inferences can be "factored through" a new property $X$ like $A_i \implies X \implies B_j$ (where by an implicating between properties I mean that an object having one property implies the object having the other property as well).

* one can make a new concept by making an old one more precise, ie/or by adding content/structure to an old concept. maybe temperature is an example? like maybe we had a sense that some things are warmer and some things are colder (granted by some opaque basic biological machinery). then perhaps one could notice that one can compare the warmths of any two objects, and that this satisfies the properties of a total ordering, at least in cases where comparisons are clear. so now all the objects are totally ordered by warmth. one can also notice that putting a warmer and colder thing in contact makes the warmer thing cool down and the colder thing warm up — tracking this can then be added to one's notion of warmth (like, it can become as if an a priori truth about warmth). next, one can construct some sort of underlying scalar quantity (this is perhaps generally a good thing to investigate whenever one has a total ordering). this can eg be obtained by 