
* could one have a landian scenario where there are just mad intelligence gains but still have values be preserved?
* if you just create the smartest possible being of a fixed size or whatever, then that doesn't preserve $\approx$any values. but my guess is that development isn't like that. my guess is that you have growing minds and broader constellations of parts, and you make next things with previous ideas, even if you are doing some mad landian thing. with this more local/time-bounded sort of development, maybe you could have a setup where some aspects are preserved for a lot of development, maybe forever? like, maybe if you let english develop for a long time, it doesn't become some optimal language, it just grows to further and further phases that are still english? ditto for biological lineages. ditto for mathematical theories — like maybe we stick with topologies set up via sets for a very long time even though there is probably a locally better thing, because we have built up so much additional structure around this choice that it is not at any point a good idea to change it? but sometimes you get multicellularity or culture or AI — sometimes a developmental context is superseded by another — and then it feels like all bets are off?
* my best guess is that you can in fact have some aspects be preserved, at least for a lot of development (like, at least thousands of years at the current speed of development in 2026, which however might not be that long in clock time), but there are many aspects you care a lot about which won't be preserved
* however i think that if you're carefully-thoughtfully selecting some hyperparams of the world, then you can get much fuller preservation for much longer. see weltgeistbehandlung and specifically protection via instrumentalization
* anyway, this means that tight controls on development are likely?
