
* a dilemma. one horn: it is good if you can destroy subtly bad, subtly cancerous things. it is good if you can destroy these things even if it is not abundantly obvious that they are bad. eg the AI industry, eg various lobby groups, eg kinds of social media. the other horn: if you give someone a license to destroy subtly bad things, then it is very hard to tell this apart from the outside from them destroying stuff with ulterior motives. like, if you had a government body doing this, it could be used to silence political opponents. you can even do this while only weeding out subtly bad things, if you're weeding them out selectively with an ulterior criterion in mind! so you need such a body to not be corrupted, but this is really hard to tell from the outside
* in general, destroying cancers makes you less able to have good structures also — some good stuff also gets destroyed (often a cancerous thing also provides something good). being more cautious makes it harder to do stuff, especially to react to novel stuff.
	* according to chatgpt, in animals, genetic modifications which reduce cancer problems also tend to make regeneration of tissue worse, and (so?) worsen aging. that's pretty interesting: try to fix dying to some nonsense outgrowing everything, and you die of everything getting old and broken. seems generally true
* removing a dangerous part/process hurts the other parts/processes which use it, potentially leaving you worse off — like, your best move could be to keep a cancerous part
	* a bit related: when destroying cancers, there is the issue of the cancer having some moral value potentially. in the human case, killing all the nietzscheans or all the consequentialists would be deeply morally problematic.
* the ideal rate of cancer shouldn't be zero i guess?
* a tension: there are systems which work as long as no "unexpected weird thing" happens; and when something weird happens, they break. (examples of weird things: realizing you should describe some aspects of the world in terms of fields, being put in a situation where some algorithm for parsing a scene into objects is no longer trustworthy or no longer makes sense, realizing time doesn't work like you thought (relativity), realizing things are quantum.) while these are perhaps understandable, they break in novel circumstances. there are systems such that when an "unexpected weird thing" happens, they can handle it: they figure out how to proceed, in some novel way, accounting for the unexpected weird thing; they can figure out how to reconfigure themselves. the issue with these systems is that they are not really understandable post weird things happening (and for a practical mind there are probably lots of weird things happening all the time — one could give a much longer list of smaller weird things for humans). the question is: are there systems which work across weird things happening, and yet are in some sense understandable throughout their unfoldings? seems really cursed, but one ought to try hard!