
work with an abelian group $G$. let $\mathbb{C}[G]$  be the group algebra with coeffs in $\mathbb{C}$. we can think of each thing here as a function from $G\to\mathbb{C}$, in fact maybe a bit like a complex measure, and multiplication in this algebra is sorta like convolution. if you make the coeffs be positive reals summing to 1 on each side, then it's actually just precisely convolving certain random variables — you are getting a $G$-valued random variable by taking two $G$-valued random variables and multiplying them (ie with the three linear combos being their three distributions)

fixing the first elt in multiplication and letting the second one vary across $\mathbb{C}[G]$, we get a linear operator from the vector space $\mathbb{C}[G]$ to itself. since $G$ is abelian, one can check that it is in fact hermitian (this is very easy to see if you think of Au dot v versus u dot Av in terms of multiplication in the group algebra — you can just commute that multiplication through). what's more, each pair of these operators for different first elts commutes (this is again a trivial consequence of the group algebra being commutative). and so they can all be jointly diagonalized together, ie for all first elts to convolve with (there are naively infinitely many here but actually they are all in the span of the finitely many group elts assuming the group is finite which we are i think (haven't thought much about what happens if G not finite), and anyway the result is also true even if there are infinitely many but one can prove that by noting they must still have a finite spanning set. see https://math.stackexchange.com/a/3604134/540174 and a comment on it mentioning the infinite case). so there is a joint orthonormal eigenbasis

a little algebra shows that sth is a joint eigenvec of all of these convolution operators iff it is a character of the group, ie a hom from the group into $\mathbb{C}$! from this, we can conclude that there is an orthonormal eigenbasis of characters. i guess what's more, if you have two characters that are not just multiples of each other, then one can see that they will have to differ on at least one eigenval wrt an operator (basically because the eigenval of chi wrt the g operator is chi(g^{-1}$)), from which it follows that they are orthogonal to each other! (it is a standard linear algebra fact that eigenvecs of a hermitian operator with distinct eigenvals must be orthogonal). it follows from this that there are no other characters also — if there were a character not among the $|G|$ many characters in a chosen orth basis (ie not a multiple of any basis elt), then we'd have something orthogonal to all these basis elts, which contradicts with it being a basis