
In this post, we set out to state a deontological principle about defection. We do not intend to engage in an exercise in engineering a novel moral concept, as we think the underlying vague principle — that of not defecting against your fellow human beans — is very intuitive, and certainly not first seen here. Instead, we attempt to specify a crisp correspondent to this intuitive concept. To say more, the intuitive principle we wish to make precise here is not that of terminally optimizing for status being immoral — we take this to be essentially self-evident — but instead that of locally optimizing for status being immoral.[^1] Note also that this post is not an attempt to argue for the deontological principle we specify (except insofar as clarifying a moral principle, much like clarifying a scientific theory, provides some sort of an argument for it — it allows one to be more certain that it makes sense, that it coheres). However, perhaps confusingly, to provide motivation for the concept we wish to precisify, we will be writing the rest of this post as if we believed in the principle of non-defection.[^2]

We start from an example. For instance, status is zero-sum, so optimizing for status constitutes defecting against your fellow human bean, even if you are doing it to amass power to do great good in the future, never terminaly being motivated by status. But, your adversarial self whispers, surely it is fine to optimize for status a little bit, if the thing you'll do is sufficiently good anyway? Running an excellent blog in which one makes tremendous progress on important matters will give one status, but it will also do good, so, so the devil whispers, it is surely fine to be somewhat motivated by status when starting a blog? We claim this is wrong — there is perhaps a core correct intuition here that directly doing good is often correlated with status, but we claim this is no reason to optimize for status, even in part.

as far as consequences/actions are concerned: Optimize for directly doing good, and you will get some outcome $X$. If optimizing for a combination of directly doing good and status would have led to an action which is also optimal for just directly doing good, then well, you might as well have optimized for directly doing good (as far as the action you ended up performing is concerned (and, to avoid the silly objection, assuming you pick lexicographically)). If optimizing for a combination of directly doing good and status would have led to an action which is suboptimal for just directly doing good, then you would have chosen a strictly less directly good action merely to gain status — an act of pure defection, of choosing to do less good to 

as far as motivations are concerned (i.e. more intrinsically than via affecting obvious consequences): It is clearly better for one's moral character, or perhaps for agents running on corrupt hardware, as well as in some deeper intrinsic/deontological sense (if any of these makes sense and is morally relevant) not to optimize for status.

The only salient caveat here is if an agent is corrupt in that they struggle to optimize for good stuff except by goodharting on status. In severe enough cases, we should probably endorse 

in summary: Of course, good stuff is correlated with status — our proposed principle is simply that one is not allowed to optimize for the component of status orthogonal to goodness (and "optimizing for the direction parallel to goodness" is just a silly and convoluted way to think about optimizing for goodness). Another way to put it is that in Kalai's (?) based decomposition of games into a cooperative part (in which the payout for each player is simply the average payout for all players) and a purely zero-sum part (in which the payout for each player is the deviation from the average for each player), not defecting means going all out in the cooperative component, and refusing to strategically consider the zero-sum component. TODO: i dont think my description quite makes sense (to me, anyway) — will need to think more to remember the decomposition or look it up

There are also other concepts which are thought to be part of status but which are not zero-sum; in particular, skill at a domain, or trustworthiness. In the context of this post, these are not included in our notion of status.

That said, if you are going to be moral in this sense, you might want to break this principle in one way, namely by avoiding associating with the (occasional) people and (frequent) systems that would badly exploit you. And be grateful to the friends (and systems?) that are willing to reciprocate!





## more stuff added later

Some remarks regarding defecting (in particular, optimizing for status, optimizing for appearing good, etc.) among something like rationalists, or something like the people that are actually trying, in particular. First, to set the prior, I will take it to be obvious that if you are a generic rationalist, then you should not be doing this among rationalists, mostly because of the usual Kantian linear interpolation argument (i.e. imagining people switching from appearance-optimizers to object-optimizers one by one and doing a linear interpolation in goodness as a function of the number of people that have switched between the obviously worse start-state and the obviously better end-state). Now, if you might have to do this anyway, then you better be special in some relevant way, to have good reason to overrule this heuristic (remember that you are in fact damaging the commons by appearance-maximizing — other considerations should outweigh this for you). I guess the main case here is maybe thinking you are in fact more worthy of status than others, i.e. more capable, more clever, etc..

[^1]: Of course, ultimately, it is a matter of tradeoffs. The actual thing we wish to capture, and the actual thing in this vicinity one might believe, is of course less binary, having to do with the tradeoff between (immediate) consequentialist considerations and not defecting against other people — the underlying messy but true principle is that the ratio between the latter and the former in one's moral calculus ought to be significantly higher than one might a priori think. Alternatively, one can think of this post as elucidating the axes this tradeoff ought to be thought in terms of.
[^2]: The author does in fact find the principle plausible, but we want the presentation here to make sense independently of the principle being right.
