
This is a remark on an example from "Dthat" by Kaplan. The example is as follows:
On my wall, there is usually a portrait of Rudolf Carnap. I point to the location where it usually is and say "This is one of the greatest philosophers of the 20th century." However, I then look at the wall and see that the portrait has been replaced by one of Jacques Lacan.

Now, I think that instead of, or at least before, thinking about what the meaning / propositional content / truth-value of my utterance is, it makes sense to distinguish between two kinds of things one would like to think about when analyzing my utterance:

1) What is the thing that I intended to communicate by saying it? 
2) What would a reasonable set of rules for communication say that such an action communicates_

It seems to me that in the local context of our interaction, all that ought to matter to my interlocutor (assuming they aren't in a philosophical mood at that moment) is 1. For instance, had they been the person that replaced the portrait, knowing that I often point at it and speak well of the person on it, to play a prank on me, they should understand that I intended to speak of Carnap and take away from my utterance the fact that I think that Carnap is one of the greatest philosopher of the 20th century (as well as any other pragmatic inferences that aren't obvious from the surface form of my utterance but may be clear from the conversational context). They should also infer, for instance, that I had not noticed that the portrait had been replaced — surely, I wouldn't call Lacan one of the greatest philosophers of the 20th century. And, insofar as they trust me and were unaware of this opinion before, they should also update somewhat towards thinking well of Carnap. I claim that these inferences (and other inferences of this kind) fully capture this instance of communication, and it seems that one can understand all of these things without understanding much at all about how reference or meaning work, at least not in our interpersonal language. Drawing correct inferences from my utterance (about my beliefs and about other aspects of the world) seems to broadly be a matter of usual updating from evidence — in this case, the evidence is my utterance. (Yes, this is assuming a certain private language in which these inferred propositions can be stated.) 

And this can be a very different question from what an utterance of this type ought to be taken to mean in a reasonable system of communication — in fact, it's plausible that this utterance ought to be taken to canonically express an affinity for Lacan instead. What interpersonal communication system to use is a very worthwhile question. It might even make a lot of sense to have the interpersonal communications system resemble each person's private language. I'm just claiming that it is perhaps clearest to think of each of the following as a priori separate:
1) each person's world-modeling/belief-representing system;
2) what kind of system for broadcasting one's beliefs (and for other things we canonically want from language) to use;
3) how to draw the correct inferences from an utterance;
and I guess I'm also claiming that these things encompass everything that philosophy of language needs to study? To clarify, I'm not saying that everything in philosophy that does not explicitly look like one of these things is worthless — in fact, it seems plausible that most things in philosophy of language can be seen to say interesting things about one of these domains of study. Mostly, I think this partition just lets us see its usual domain of study more clearly. 
