I have recently come to think that my lack of appreciation for certain fields of math might have been due to paying insufficient attention to the meta-level while studying them. I anticipate that what I say here will be obvious for many.
For example, on the object level, commutative algebra appears to be a long list of boring small propositions and lemmas with few cool ideas involved in proofs. I have thought for a long-ish time now that the interesting parts are in coming up with (and extending) the formalism, and that this could in fact be quite interesting, but that the exercises one usually encounters in a commutative algebra class/textbook are far from being of this kind. But only more recently (as of the time of writing this in March 2023), I have come to consider actualizing this insight in my mathematical practice by putting more emphasis while learning e.g. topics in algebra on the meta-level goals/concerns/incentives that the people coming up with the the framework might have been guided by. One can do this without knowing anything about the actual history at all (though I begrudgingly admit that learning about the history could be helpful[^1]). For instance, in the future, I intend to think more about the following:
1. How does a particular definition fit into a mathematical narrative?
2. What kinds of things is a generalized definition useful/crucial for proving, compared to a specialization?
3. What would happen when certain assumptions were dropped from a theorem? Will one get a weaker conclusion which still yields an interesting subset of the corollaries? Are there other interesting results one can prove with this version of the theorem?
4. Does a new theorem stand in the above relation to another more specific theorem? Are there other previously familiar analogous theorems? 
5. (should add more stuff here)
This seems quite obvious in retrospect. Incidentally, I think aiming to discuss this is a good reason to make friends with mathematicians, and with the people in your mathematics classes in particular.

[^1]: I am actually not as disinterested in history as this might sound like, but I sort of do hold a grudge against like all but the top $5\%$ least historicist works in philosophy, for example.
