

https://arxiv.org/pdf/1405.7907.pdf

The situation is: a measurement has been made: the spin of a particle (ie the one which is having its spin measured) has become entangled with the measurement apparatus, and the measurement apparatus has become entangled with the rest of the laboratory, and the rest of the laboratory has become entangled with you-the-observer, but still, you-the-observer do not yet know what the result of the measurement is — you haven't looked yet! Oh also, there's an outside-environment that's not you or the measurement apparatus or the particle (spoiler: this outside-environment will have another quantum coinflip in it). Let us consider unitary transformations which only act on the environment — ie, if one writes the state as a linear combo of pure tensors of your laboratory (containing you and the measuring apparatus and the particle) with the rest of the world, then these would be transformations which are a tensor of the identity operator acting on your laboratory with an arbitrary unitary acting on the rest of the world. Now I think their (first?) key claim is that acting on the rest of the universe with such an operator should not change the probabilities you assign to the spin having been up or down. (I'm not entirely sure yet about the sense in which the environment can be acted on with such a unitary transformation here. Are we imagining some physical time-evolution process actually happening, and saying your probabilities should not change before and after? One obvious issue here is that they consider environments which are entangled with you, so it seems hard to actually have such physical process. But maybe that's fine, as long as it kinda-sorta could happen, and our probability assignments should still make sense in somewhat hypothetical cases? I guess I'm worried here that this kind of thing is in tension with something they say later about how you relate to a coinflip-out-there. Probably I'm misunderstanding what they're saying.)



