
It currently seems plausible to me that we'll get theorem-provers that can tackle things of the caliber of the millennium problems before we get AGI. In fact, suppose an alignment researcher thinks that most of their 'direct impact' (whatever that means — I'm just trying to exclude the EV that learning has) will be 'produced' during the period $P$ between such theorem-provers and AGI.[^1] Should such a researcher forgo math practice, and focus instead on philosophy[^2] (let's say without proof that there's nothing other than math and philosophy (physics and the stamp-collecting sciences being in the business of turning philosophy into math))?

I'm quite certain the answer is no, and I will now briefly argue for that. Suppose, I think [in the imagination of someone that would think formalism-building is valuable but mathematical ability isn't] prototypically so, that one's research during $P$ would look like writing down some formal problems that capture something philosophico-intuitively important and then asking the theorem-prover to solve these problems (i.e., prove or disprove the formal statement). I claim this will go down much worse if one hasn't been practicing math. (Tho note a caveat that might blossom into a disagreement with the point I'm making here if tended to: there might be some way to use an automated theorem-prover to learn a lot of math really quickly. I haven't thought carefully enough about this.) First, let's think about physics. A lot of good physics looks like making a bunch of claims in some semi-formal system that'd be quite hard to formalize (e.g. QFT, I've heard). For a human, I think operating in such a system is basically the same skill as operating in a mathematical system — the way we see mathematical systems is very close to the way we see such semi-formal systems.[^3] And building a good formal system typically takes a lot of operating in such a less formal system first.

Of course, we could also imagine a theorem-prover that also does the bit of transforming intuitive pictures into formal ones, and that would indeed get us quite far. But also, that'd probably only exist after $P$.[^4]

Secondly (well, relatedly — maybe $1.35$-edly because both points are really about how we understand stuff), even if we're at the stage with a body of knowledge where we've sort of figured out enough that we can fairly easily, asking the right questions in this formal system requires understanding the mathematical concepts. We come to understand mathematical objects not by reading the definition in ZFC, but by playing around with them: we understand a theorem by figuring out what it implies, what simpler theorem it generalizes, what theorem it is analogous to in another setting, getting to know its proof, computing a certain example and seeing it or its proof 'work out', etc..[^5] Imagine having to come up with reasonable theorems to prove in game theory without having an intuitive understanding of the mathematical concepts involved!

So, at the end of the day, one cares about philosophical stuff, one tries to turn it into math, but one's ability to turn it into math is really not at all independent of understanding math — you really do need to understand math to have any chance to turn philosophical messiness into appropriate math!

Well, I haven't really performed an exhaustive analysis here of the space of possible strategies and concluded that the best one  there's also the wordcel kind of philosophy, the kind that, I claim, is not making a sufficient effort to make notions sufficiently well-defined to build upon — this is roughly the same as formalizing these notions — turning them into math.[^6] But, (1) that's no good and (2) even if it were any good, the theorem-prover thing would hardly be a crux, so this is outside the scope of this post as the intention here is to only analyze, roughly speaking, whether math being solved in some critical period would be a reason not to develop one's mathematical understanding.


# remark 2025
the hypothetical no longer seems that plausible to me lol. probably the world is very crazy like at most a month after math AGI by default?

## refuse

— in particular, let's say they also think ML is an intellectual dumpster fire

[^1]: I'm not implying I believe this. I haven't thought very carefully about this — my vibe here is one of uncertainty. My meta-vibe on this uncertain vibe is that it might dissolve significantly if I thought harder about it for a few hours — I haven't put the hours in yet.
[^2]: I want to caveat this by saying that the math/physics/philosophy distinction is somewhat unfortunate — I take it to be less crisp than I might seem to be taking it from this phrase alone.
[^3]: In fact, if the theorem-prover thought about math as humans do, I think we'd probably be near or in AGI-land. But I think there's a significant probability that we'd get a theorem-prover that does math quite differently than humans do, sort of like how alphazero plausibly does chess quite differently.
[^4]: I think mathematical arguments at the level of detail given in current research writeups might well be formalizable by an artificial system before the end of $P$ (or even perhaps before its start (or even perhaps being a precursor)).
[^5]: I'm only making this claim in the prosaic sense that all this really helps us get mathematical concepts. I don't want to make any more profound claim here, e.g., that this is what understanding math 'consists of'.
[^6]: Incidentally, if a piece of thought (e.g., a research paper or post) contributes to building a body of understanding, then, roughly speaking, it is not the case that this piece of thought can be understood by anyone reasonably smart. The rare exception is the piece of work that sets the foundations of a body of understanding (or provides an improved restatement) — some likely examples here (of which I've read/skimmed only a couple) are Euclid's geometry/math thing, Newton's physics thing, Shannon's information theory thing, Turing's computation theory thing, and maybe some econ thing by Smith or Ricardo (I say 'maybe' here because I think the current econ system is sort of weak and there's might be a better thing to be built in that vicinity). Of course, such work is extremely valuable — these are the philosophy papers that turn branches of philosophy into sciences — into compounding systems of understanding!
