
Consider a conversation on some claim $P$, e.g. whether a certain mathematical claim is true, whether a certain policy is good, whether a certain piece of art is insightful, or whether a certain research direction is promising. I will describe what I think is a very common failure mode in such conversations. I claim without proof that to make progress on answering $P$, it is good to reduce discussion of $P$ to discussions of subclaims $P_1,P_2,\ldots,P_k$, which might then recursively each be split further into subclaims, and so on. I claim that to make progress on answering $P$, it is very important to mentally track the current subclaim that is being discussed, and to keep one's energy focused on answering it. In particular, I think it is very common (even among smart people, especially when discussing philosophical topics) to jump back to a higher level without realizing one is committing a grave sin. I think figuring stuff out in a conversation is almost completely hopeless if one party does this. If one jumps up in the tree before a sublcaim has been satisfactorily settled, then it is almost always the case that the partial progress made on answering the subclaim contributes nothing to improving understanding of the claim above it.

It is plausible to me that pulling this off well effectively requires a large working memory / intentional use of long-term memory or external aids (in particular, take notes or use an voice-to-text AI to transcribe the conversation + maybe a language model to distill the transcription). Minimally, one needs to store the conversation tree, i.e. the hierarchy of claims to which the original theorem has been reduced. Ideally, one is able to keep some good representation of this in working memory to be able to e.g. do error-correction on the hierarchy on the fly — i.e., realize when the explicit statement of a subclaim was not quite what would best fit into that slot in the conversation tree (e.g. a claim turning out to be false on a technicality, but this only being possible because of a slight mistake in the statement of the claim). In general, I think one should have at least have the current subclaim (very important) and the claim one step above it in working memory. 