
this is the alignment "problem":
* to make a machine which does some difficult (usually "soft" and preservation-style) thing over a very long time

for instance, to make a machine that safeguards the free resource-rich life of a particular human (from external threats and perhaps also from certain kinds of [internal threats]/suicide)

We can study this in toy settings. For instance, we can speak of finite game-of-life initial configurations which preserve a certain blinker forever, or at least until some time. If our job is to just create an initial configuration that preserves a blinker forever, then this is easy: just create an empty board except for the blinker.

Generalizing this a bit: a major case in which we can pull this off is when we have the entire future history planned out. This can happen even in practice! For instance, we are probably not too far technologically from being able to make probes that would turn most of the mass-energy in the galaxy into our favorite type of tiny squiggle or whatever, absent intelligent resistance.

This suggests the following two options:
* One option is to try to come up with an explicit good future and make devices which implement that.
	* One issue with this is that our values might not be that happy with any such future, or slightly more weakly that we might not be able to come up with a satisfactory such plan by any finite time as beings embedded in this universe whose path we are supposed to choose. For instance, you yourself might want to keep being able to grow up more later and to pick new projects to engage in later, without ever having a clear idea of what is to come after. I think this is plausible or even likely.
	* Another issue with this is that even if our values are in principle happy with some such future and we can in fact satisfactorily finish designing it by some finite time, it seems likely that we are presently extremely far from that point — like, we need to carry out a very long reflection before we can settle on a satisfactory design. I think that even if the first supposedly-issue turns out to really be a non-issue, this is probably still present.
* The other option is to somehow handle make a device which preserves the difficult property even when you can't really properly see what the future will be like ahead of time.

Let's state the dichotomy again and a little differently. One option is to well-see some sort of future with a device, but this requires that future to be "kind of small" wrt you. The other option is to somehow create a device that probably makes the future good even though you cannot well-see that future. It'd be nice to be able to say the following sentence more clearly and more firmly: if you can well-see the future, then the future must be small/tile-y. But I'll continue in a different direction.

Can we come up with at least some interesting classes of futures one cannot well-see but in which some property is still securely preserved? There's a fundamental tension here: if you cannot well-see the future, then who knows if some weird thing happens, and weird things can fuck with your property. For instance, you set up a good governance structure for a polity, you get the constitution to be really nice, but the polity blows itself up with ASI later. But how strong is this issue?

Here's one trick we can use to make a technically open-ended future in which a property is preserved:
* We establish some sort of robust cordon between the part of the world/computation/process which determines whether the property is preserved and the part that is open-ended. We have a "small future" that can be foreseen in the property-preserving part and something really weird in the open-ended part. This is fine as long as the cordon can withstand the mess happening in the open-ended component. Like, with our current sense of how fast development happens in time, maybe this sort of thing could last for on the order of a century? This night's watch will need to keep developing itself to some extent, to withstand this progressland for longer. I guess the idea is that it might develop somewhat less wildly than progressland — it might be easier to hold on to its duty to preserve the treasure this way. It's plausible that the night's watch does not need to be stronger than progressland, it just needs to be willing and able to cause enough damage to progressland if it attacks to make attacking in order to get the resources from the nature preserve not being worth it.
* In the case where we're giving the world as some sort of program or other mathematical object, we can of course bake the cordon into the structure of the world very strongly. Like, we can make two non-interacting game of life boards. The above is a more exciting version of this idea.
* Let us call this the non-interacting union.

There is also the idea of finding an honorable guy, and giving them reason to promise to protect the property, and then just entrusting the protection of the property in an open-endedly developing world to them. Of course, the honorable guy will also be open-endedly developing (there is in fact a central case where the guy is most of the world). And so things might well go wrong. We cannot see the future clearly in this case! But I think it still makes sense to have reasonable probability on the property being preserved for quite a long time.

Again, the issue is that all sorts of shit can happen. Oceans rise, empires fall, a meteorite or an engineered pathogen or an ASI might kill us all. The entity that is preserving the property needs to be able to handle all this stuff — like, forever. But it's not that easy to handle this stuff (you could think that our science and democracy would be able to take ASI seriously, but it seems to be too difficult!), and it probably cannot be figured out ahead of time. This probably means it is in some sense a fundamentally fucked problem. Preserving a property across wild open-ended development is an infinite endeavor. But could one at least continue to try easily, even if there are all these things threatening to kill one that one might fail to handle? The issue is that the wildness can just make you no longer try, right! Or maybe I should say: there isn't really a sense in which you can just continue to try, such that you are given a pass for killing yourself with ASI because that was really too hard to figure out, because the only natural way to do that involves giving you a pass for everything, but then this is a total weaksauce kind of "really continuing to try". Or maybe there is some way to give you a pass for some such things while not considering you completely immune to blame? Obviously, sometimes it makes sense to draw a line through a spectrum. Maybe the point I'm making here is that there is genuinely a fucked mess spectrum, and so there is not any nice way to give you a pass for killing yourself with ASI but not for other stuff like wilfully injecting yourself with a shot of promisebreakin.


