
# On "Before we have an incredibly intelligent AI, we will probably have a slightly worse AI."
There are two different things we could have in mind when speaking of previous worse AIs before ASI, under the assumption that some sort of continual learning/play process is involved in (creating) the first ASI:
* We could mean the other dumber AIs inside this continual learning process before ASI. But these AIs could come only weeks or days earlier, so I think this version of the argument doesn't support [at least order 1 year from SAR to ASI].[^1]
* So we probably mean AIs in previous training processes.[^2] Here are some ways previous training processes could fail to reach SAR: people didn't put serious resources into getting a continual learning process to work before, or weren't quite trying the right sort of thing, or didn't try a good combination of ideas, or made some mistakes so it didn't really work (I think changing some hyperparameters can take a thing from basically not working to basically working), or some underlying capability parameter of a base model was low enough that they didn't see signs of life yet (you can have a phase transition in whether sth works depending on a continuous underlying parameter), or the previous continual learning setup basically worked but it was going like $100\times$ slower because various things were still kinda bad so this previous version didn't climb to SAR before the next version climbed to ASI.

Generally, I agree that before the first ASI, there are various previous AIs that are somewhat worse. But the quantitative version of this argument which one would want to rely on to say that there is a previous training process which gave a SAR isn't clear to me at all. I think most of our disagreement comes from different views on how big a step up SAR->ASI is (like, I have more probability on SAR only being slightly worse than ASI, in the sense of only having a slightly worse architecture and training process etc). This contributes both to the difference in our probabilities on "the first SAR is (or quickly becomes) an ASI" and to the difference in our probabilities on "software progress gets you from SAR to ASI quickly". I make some points on this in the next sections.

# On the nature of the first SAR
Some object-level considerations about the first SAR:
* Given that the first SAR is better than the best humans at AI research, it's probably at least very high in the human distribution at math and theoretical science research already. This is for a few reasons:
	* There's a lot of overlap/similarity between tasks in AI research and tasks in math and theoretical science.
	* Being better than the best humans at AI research probably implies being very good at novel domain learning in the context of AI research. Like, it'll be able to come up with completely new training methods, completely new architectures, and do the equivalent of writing novel textbooks on these topics for itself. If you can do novel domain learning in the context of AI, the machinery that lets you do that probably transfers to also doing novel domain learning in the context of math or theoretical science as well. Like, to a large extent, there isn't [novel domain learning in the context of AI research] as a separate thing from novel domain learning simpliciter.
* SAR will be able to take some type of task it sucks at and figure out how to not suck at it. It will be able to come up with methods, learn skills, make tools. In particular, if SAR is still worse than humans at some cognitive work, it will be able to look at examples of humans doing the thing and learn our tricks. Like, the first SAR is the sort of system that can make itself not suck at things it initially sucks at.
* The new ideas and methods you develop can effectively make you more capable.
* The first SAR will also probably be able to become better at novel domain learning.
* For example, Terence Tao seems pretty close to a math (A)SI when measured against humans from 1700? This means it is fairly natural to become much more capable just by inventing new ideas + concepts + methods + tricks + etc (like, new intellectual content, without changing your brain architecture much).
* summarizing the last couple points: The first SAR will probably be able to do at least some meaningful self-improvement in the course of its normal deployment.

an analogy: Imagine that we find out we are in a simulation and there's some aliens in the outside universe who have a civilization with different laws of physics. Imagine that we are 1000x faster than these aliens at math and coding and there's $100\times$ more of us. I think it's likely we have a strong enough "general learning ability" that we can quickly take over basically all cognitive work in their economy if we want to.

a slightly meta point:
* I think there's a very strong implication from SAR to ASI in mindspace in general. Like, almost all possible superhuman AI researchers are ASIs. Unfortunately for things being that simple, we are interested in AIs around the first SAR, and those will be extremely non-central examples of SARs. In particular, we should expect them to be extremely defective compared to the typical SAR. I think part of the disagreement could be about how strong the general SAR=>ASI argument is vs how strong this "but the first SAR Is weirdly defective" defeater is.

# An outside-view point about p(a trendline breaks upward somewhat shortly before a milestone is hit)
I want to state a general point about trendlines. Imagine that capabilities $y(t)$ are the max of two functions increasing in time, say $y_1=$ amount of skills/tricks/ideas copied from humans and $y_2=$ amount of skills/tricks/ideas invented by AIs. (You can also make the same point with the more natural $y=y_1+y_2$ but it becomes a bit more convoluted so I'll stick with $y=\max(y_1,y_2)$. We could also have a more complicated model where there are more things $y_i$ involved, like the amount discovered more blindly by RL and the contribution of ideas "put into the architecture and learning setup", but I think this wouldn't change the basic point.) Imagine that $y_2$ is increasing much faster than $y_1$ but also "starting" later, so maybe $y_1=t$ and $y_2=100t-c$, with $c$ some unknown constant. Then at some time there will be a trendline break from slope $1$ to slope $100$. One can say that the probability this trendline break happened shortly before $t$ for any specific pre-chosen $t$ is low. Fair enough, but on the other hand, the probability that the trendline break happened shortly before hitting some specific $y$ value (such as ASI) can simultaneously be high. The specifics here will depend on the prior on $c$ and the $y$ value but hopefully this point is already clear without working out the math.

That said, I think you guys [have higher probabilities on the current trendline you're seeing already getting to the ASI level sooner] than I do, and this point matters less if you think the current trendline is already getting there soon. Hmm but I guess you have like order 50 year timelines to ASI without an algo progress speedup from AIs though? And then maybe this consideration is actually still interesting for you — like, assuming no AI assistance, we can state the same argument with sth like the amount of work humans would need to put into making better AIs on the x axis instead of time.
# A point on the size/hardness of the step between SAR and ASI
It's imo probably not possible to get to SAR while relying that much on human imitation. SAR will already need to be able to do years of research independently. It'll need to be able to basically write itself textbooks on basically novel questions. It will need to be able to invent and gain basically novel cognitive skills. My guess is that your intuitions and model for how hard getting through 1 SD of human capability come from empirics in a regime which is very based on human imitation, and are probably not that appropriate for thinking about the SAR->ASI step. (I still haven't thought through your model for thinking 100 years of algo progress separate SAR from ASI, so this guess about where your pace parameter in the relevant regime comes from is weakly held.) Like, if human imitation were not in the picture, 1 SD of human IQ would probably be a very small difference. SAR will probably be hit in a regime where learning new tricks isn't tied to having 100000 human AI trainers teach you tricks. I think the reason why one could squint and say it currently takes time $t$ to go through each human capability SD will have become mostly obsolete by the time SAR is hit. I think there's probably at most a small difference between generators that produce a SAR and generators that produce an ASI.

# My attempt at estimating the number of years of software research separating SAR from ASI by continuing some IQ trendline
Setting aside the fact that I think extrapolating as if AIs gain const human SDs per year of research probably isn't appropriate in the SAR->ASI regime (well, I also think it's already pretty weird in the current regime), I tried my own extrapolation of this kind with some toy numbers, and got like 60 years. I think going through this calculation made your 100 year claim seem less crazy to me. That median doesn't look crazy to me if somehow progress up to SAR is extremely based on human imitation. Overall I'd currently give maybe 15% to >1 year from SAR to ASI, or maybe more if I'm in the mood of deferring to you guys or Constellation.

Here's my reasoning for the 60 year number with a bunch of parameters pulled out of my ass (hopefully not motivatedly):
* How many skill SDs are AIs gaining per year currently? I think this is a weird question but if I have to say something, I'll say 1 SD.
* How many SDs is the median professional vs top human in the field gap? It will depend on the field and who counts as a professional. Let's say there are at most $10^6$ professionals in most scientific fields. Then this will be at most 4.8 SDs.
* How big is the current gap between AIs in AI research vs other fields? It seems pretty weird to assign IQ scores to current AIs but my guess is that this is currently at most 1 SD lower for most other kinds of conceptual work? (This is 1 year of progress given the first guess on this list, and saying the difference between domains is $<1$ year of progress seems fair enough looking at https://metr.org/blog/2025-07-14-how-does-time-horizon-vary-across-domains/, under the hypothesis that the outliers are because of some fundamentally easy vision stuff being missing which will be easy to solve around SAR.) I will assume this gap stays fixed until SAR. (Maybe you think this gap will be wider by SAR?)
* This suggests that to get from SAR to ASI, one needs to add $2\cdot 4.8+1=10.6$ SDs beyond SAR (not sure how well this 2x SDs thing aligns with your ASI definition though).
* What fraction of these SDs would they be gaining with software progress alone? The numbers I remember off the top of my head are that $20\%$ of AI progress is data and $40\%$ are algos, so I guess we should say $40\%-60\%$. I'll say $50\%$.
* However, we should imagine the human researchers not getting to experiment with new bigger models, so at least after a while, algo progress will be slower than it would be in practice. Idk what factor to put here. I hope I'm understanding correctly that in your setup, there is a cap on the floating point operations per second that can be used for experiments, but not on the total number of floating point operations, so that scales linearly in time. There's the correction that [ideas which are only viable at more compute] will not be found now, and you'll soon just generally have less compute for finding new algo ideas than you would have had if compute scaling continued. I'd guess that the slowdown factor from this isn't bad initially but gets worse over time. Idk I'll say 0.4 on average.
* This suggests $\frac{10.6}{1\cdot 0.5\cdot 0.4}=53$ years.
* I guess this is for a typical other field, and ASI is for virtually all other fields, and maybe there should be a correction for that. (OTOH the SAR definition also kinda has a universal quantifier over the different things an AI researcher does.) Idk I'll say $60$ years.





Is your median time from SAR to ASI like 6 months (with the definitions from https://ai-2027.com/research/takeoff-forecast )? That seems too long to me.
* First, I think it's plausible that the first process that creates a SAR just directly leads to ASI. E.g. you can have this happen by an AI building up more cognitive skills in a continual learning loop. This seems quite natural for an AI that can "properly figure out how to do novel things", which SAR must be able to do. I think this option would suggest <1 month from SAR to ASI, and maybe even less than a day.
* Second, even if a single process foom doesn't happen, I think that the AIs-doing-AI-research path also probably gives <1 month. I haven't thought through your model in detail, but the human-only software-only times for each step seem crazy long to me, and maybe there's a crux there. Am I understanding correctly that your median time for how long it would take the human capabilities research community to come up with software improvements getting from SAR to ASI is around 100 years? My median guess for this is <1 year. Like, shouldn't something on the order of coming up with reasoning models be sufficient, which one can come up with and get to work in on the order of a year? If you still stand by your median of 100 years and your model for deriving that, I'll put time into understanding it, but I thought I'd try to see if this simple argument would work first.

[^1]: Ok I'm realizing that it isn't completely obvious this would take < 1 month. Maybe by ASI we won't be doing new training runs from scratch at all, and will instead be running some sort of months-long continual learning and self-improvement process that's making progress slower than I would have intuitively thought for such a thing? This taking order 1 year to climb from SAR to ASI would still be really weird I think.
[^2]: If your median SAR->ASI time is 1-1.5 years, then your claim is that the training processes 1 year before the first ASI would probably already get to SAR. I have maybe 60% that a training process 2 months before ASI wouldn’t even get to SAR (though a good chunk of this 60% has a SAR-making process first and then a separate ASI-making process). I updated my median takeoff time up a bit when writing this response compared to when I wrote my original comments btw. Our disagreement is a bit less acute now, but I think a big disagreement still remains.
