
why a language model trained on a human's inputs-outputs implements a very different structure than the human:
* first, a structure that generates data is just not the kind of thing you want for predicting data generated by that structure. consider a probabilistic turing machine vs the bayesian thing you'd need to do to optimally predict it
* to which you say: sure, but maybe the model simulates all possible versions of the human? 
* to which i say: no. first, there are much better strategies for prediction. second, the structure of the human's mind is not findable by such end-to-end gradient descent
	* re the first: humans don't predict things by simulating them, but by thinking about them rather differently. we understand and analyze, we identify particular trends and continue them
	* re the second: even a group operation will be performed by many shit circuits by a neural net. we can be very sure that the structure of a NN will not contain in it anything like the structure of the human mind. so the structure will certainly be vastly different. still, maybe a different structure can do basically the same thing? in this case, it won't any time soon. think about neural doom https://gamengen.github.io/ . eg goal-tracking cognitive circuitry is just too deep i'm guessing. the pretrained thing will go off-track too quickly. it has very different priorities than saying on-task
	* more re the second: even an LLM trained on inputs and outputs from another LLM with the same architecture will probably not become that LLM to a very meaningful extent (but this is sorta a guess and i don't even know what i should mean by this precisely). and this should be much easier because of the following:
		* the first LLM being much shallower to begin with
		* the first LLM having structures which are sorta appropriate for the second LLM to learn because:
			* they have the same architecture
			* they are still trained largely similarly
* anyway (sorta relatedly to the last point about going off-track too quickly), the thing won't really be able to learn, and you can't do research if you can't learn




