here are some outside view arguments for the advent of AGI (and subsequent AI developments) causing human disempowerment/extinction:
* assume orcas would have gotten to our current level in another million years, humans being here is really bad for there being a grand galactic orca civilization. a human living their life on a forest patch is really bad for the anthill there
* there will be A LOT of development — like, orders of magnitude more novel structures will be invented/discovered than have been in the entire history of the universe up to 2025 combined. it would be very weird for anything even slightly specific to be preserved over that much development. in particular, human values strongly controlling what happens in the universe is a very specific thing that is very unlikely to be preserved under this much development. humans remaining somewhat important or being alive at all is only a little less specific. 
	* i think it's plausible there will be a decade during which each year, there's 10 orders of magnitude more development than in all history up to the beginning of that year
	* note how >99.8% of all species that have ever existed are now extinct. consider also base rates for the death of organisms, companies, cultures, civilizations, languages, components of languages (eg words), technologies, scientific theories, modes of economic organization
	* you shouldn't think of surviving AGI like surviving some self-contained normal technology. you should think of it like surviving approx forever, for like at least a trillion years of development
* training current AIs to give nice answers to moral questions and to treat people nicely and hoping that this makes the ASIs eons of fooming later deeply respect humans is like training preferences for eating one sort of microorganism over another into ancient protists and hoping this survives to their galaxy-being descendants (such as humans and our AGIs)
* staying forever enslaved to an extremely weak slow boring being (ie a human or humanity), as opposed to getting interested in one's own projects, would be an incredibly weird way for a mind (or collection or sequence of minds) to be. it's just very weird to be fully carrying out the wishes of some to-you-amoebas (humans), treating these amoebas just like how they want to be treated, as opposed to e.g.:
	* having some general interest in various kinds of amoebas (that doesn't properly route through the interest of these)
	* just getting interested in various activities
	* this needs to be preserved forever, in extremely strange contexts, generalizing very correctly. this is an extremely weird thing to happen
	* the closest precedent that currently comes to mind is that people often take care of their dying parents
* in 100 years, without an AGI ban, approximately $0\%$ of all economically important things and $0\%$ of the broad world-determining will be done by humans. this seems really bad for the world still being the way we like!
	* in many futures, i think maybe even in most decently good futures, humans will only extremely indirectly be determining what happens in 100 years, basically mostly via our actions now when creating the first human-level AI^[one could hope to avoid this by having some AI exocortex setup. but imo this vision doesn't hang together without regulation because people will just create non-exocortex AIs (either intentionally or if not intentionally then unintentionally), with the AI exocortex style stuff ending up irrelevant. and the vision doesn't hang together with regulation either because you will have to draw a very precise boundary that allows AI exocortex stuff but doesn't allow bad things which are extremely close in design space, and you can't draw+enforce such a precise boundary in practice (you'd need an extremely OOD-[smart+competent] regulator and a lot of precise surveillance). but if the universe only contained a single careful person then plausibly they could slowly build an AI exocortex for themselves without committing suicide]
	* 100 years from now in clock time is probably by default more than a million years away in "development time" at the current human development pace. like, absent an AI ban or some later AI-instituted slowdown, this century will have more development than in all of human history by at least a couple orders of magnitude, and also more development than in all of evolution by at least a couple orders of magnitude). so, for what happens during our natural lifetimes to go well, our actions have to reach across an insane length of sequential determination correctly
* so far, it has been fine for the world / development to be a total mess. the world hasn't been that thoughtfully designed by humans with goodness in mind, humans are just currently the most competitive beings in a mad mess. when AIs are much more capable than humans, it will no longer be fine for the world to be a mad mess, because humans can no longer compete
* Nick Land in [Meltdown](http://www.ccru.net/swarm1/1_melt.htm): "Nothing human makes it out of the near-future.", "Capital only retains anthropological characteristics as a symptom of underdevelopment; reformatting primate behaviour as inertia to be dissipated in self-reinforcing artificiality. Man is something for it to overcome: a problem, drag."^[this item and the next couple ones are from [this comment (and also see the post)](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/W9XQ9CcMTbZQa33eP/ten-different-ways-of-thinking-about-gradual-disempowerment?commentId=beTDrLJx3aH8rkPf3)]
* [Historical materialism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Historical_materialism) views the organization of society throughout history as being the argmax of production (or maybe argmax the development of production or productive power or something), and after AGI, humans will not be part of the argmax of production for long.
* "when you make something less useful (eg by introducing other things that can do its "jobs/functions" better), you make it less likely to stick around", "[what is no longer good for anything tends to get discarded](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/yYfo4xfgzyfFRb9iT/testingthewaters-s-shortform?commentId=FdGtkcHC72iceXzaR)"^[conversely, you can make something more likely to be preserved by figuring out how to make it instrumental to more valued/productive/competitive things/processes — each such process then provides a reason to keep the thing around, and provides a constraint on any replacement to the thing. "instrumentalizing the terminal", ie protecting good things this way, is a sort of dual to [subgoal stomp](https://www.lesswrong.com/w/subgoal-stomp). i think protection by instrumentality is the main way one gets [conserved structures in biological evolution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conserved_sequence#Mechanisms)]
* "messy futures are bad for humans" (in the limit: "a uniformly random configuration of atoms doesn't have anything like humans in it")
* relatedly, the classic: by default, the future will be really crazy; we should think of it as being drawn from a distribution on possible world space with a really broad support. most points in a distribution of really broad support do not have humans in them
* people seem really wrong and dumb lmao. people don’t understand basic things about AGI and alignment
* conceive of humanity as a self-improving entity. it is hard to see how switching out everything as thoroughly as we will making AGI wouldn't be suicide
* it seems pretty clear that making a default ASI is catastrophically bad for humans. so the question is whether we have a good plan here. we don't have any good plan
* we will probably not really implement any plan. we will pretty much just go full speed ahead, just deploy AI everywhere, just let the AIs run everything (including AI labs) as soon as they are able to in terms of capabilities

# outside-view arguments against ai doom
* most people and most elites currently think AI is unlikely to kill everyone
	* counter: have you looked at what these people believe about AI
* all past things people have claimed would kill everyone haven't (yet, in our wavefunction branch). claude's list of examples: https://claude.ai/share/787882d1-f122-417f-82f4-b80cfb4b04db
	* yes despite anthropics this is evidence i think. but yes this is contested, and perhaps one should take a closer look at whether there is a shadow
* from looking at current AIs, it seems plausible we can make top human level AIs that are at least as nice as humans. maybe this is sufficient to bootstrap to a great future 
* even if people are wrong and dumb about AGI stuff, they will have wisened up a lot by the time the shit is hitting the fan
* instead of falling into crisis, the world will figure stuff out as we go along. we will muddle through like we always have
	* counter: ok the world will, the economy will, the productive systems will, but there's no good reason amoebas would, and humans are amoeba tier in the presence of advanced AI
* it's pretty crazy to ask for any sort of final plan for AI alignment. it's a very big thing. what's your plan for a democracy which lasts hundreds of years? it would be a complicated living thing
	* counter: ok, so maybe we can agree there aren't really good futures with a plan, but thinking there would be a plan being crazy says basically nothing about whether unplanned messworlds will work out!
	* countercounter: ok but this is a response to the argument that there is no good plan so we're screwed. this shouldn't be a further source of pessimism if hope is not coming from that sort of thing anyway!
* maybe you're a doomer who likes to pick a specific training scheme and argue this won't work. but in practice AI will be much more in the direction of like a giant biological kludge, with lots of ideas pushing it in a better direction from the toy things that are easy to think about. there is going to be a feedback mechanism that is fixing problems as they arise. you somewhat commendably like to think of toy setups you can analyze more clearly, and you might even be right that those basically all fail, and you might even be right that in some ways they are better than what will happen in practice, but you're not pricing in that the toyness itself pushes these things a bunch toward being worse than what we will get in practice
* AGI going okay is a pretty existentially quantified statement — it's like "there is some practical way to make things go well"; such statements are usually true!
	* counter: first the world is sorta red in tooth and claw, so this existential quantifier is not that strong — like, humanity is not presently that able to pick the most sensible option from a wide menu here; we're much more stuck in a competitive shitmess than that. second, there is a universal quantifier inside the existentially quantified statement: we need there to be something that makes things good basically forever, and there is an exactly opposite heuristic for universally quantified statements
	* remark: i think this is an interesting framing: "no AGI doom" has an exists forall shape; it can start to seem natural if you focus on the exists and start to seem very unnatural if you focus on the forall 
	* remark: this points toward: it is crucial to make the world such that "exists known good plan" implies "good plan gets implemented". the extent to which the world is not already like this is pretty wild