

response to this: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/YiRsCfkJ2ERGpRpen/leogao-s-shortform?commentId=n2CmnvuqZhj7kNrCz

# probably shouldn't post this

> If a superintelligence governs the world, preventing extinction or permanent disempowerment for the future of humanity, without itself posing these dangers, then it could be very useful. It's unclear how feasible setting up something like this is, before originally-humans can be uplifted to a similar level of competence. But also, uplifting humans to that level of competence doesn't necessarily guard (the others) against permanent disempowerment or some other wasteful breakdowns of coordination, so a governance-establishing superintelligence could still be useful.

I agree that if one could e.g. make an alien AI that monitors and destroys all other AGI attempts for 100 years and does nothing else, that would be an extremely good thing to do. I agree it is non-obvious whether pulling something like this off is more or less feasible than succeeding with ways to AGI-x-derisk which do not involve creating non-human top thinkers, such as (1) using methods more usual than superintelligent takeover to change society to be such that there aren't any strong forces attempting to create AGI, or (2) having such a takeover be done by human mind uploads. All of these are imo really hard; my guess is that stuff not involving making an alien top thinker has a greater overall probability of getting humanity through at least the next few centuries, but I think this is far from obvious. And I agree that there is also a very real concern that the mind uploads would screw over everyone else and potentially also become inhuman in other respects and go on to do bizarre valueless stuff. 

> Superintelligence works as a threshold-concept for a phase change compared to the modern world. Non-superintelligent AGIs are still just an alien civilization that remains in principle similar in the kinds of things it can do to humanity (even if they reproduce to immediately fill all available compute, and think 10,000x faster). While superintelligence is something at the next level, even if it only takes non-superintelligent AGIs to transition to superintelligence a very short time (if they decide to do that, rather than to not do that).

I definitely agree it makes sense and is interesting to consider the following property of an AI: it being much more intelligent/capable than any current human, or than all of current humanity combined. As I said in my comment, I'm fine with saying "create a superintelligence" — I just think it's funny to say "create superintelligence". That phrasing makes it sound like we're talking of creating some definite particular thing. I think that there are extremely many genuinely very different options for what kind of first superintelligent system could come into existence, and that extremely many more (maybe successor) superintelligent systems will come into existence after it, and so the phrase "create superintelligence" sounds funny. edit: oops i was being sillywrong minimally with this explanation. eg "create sentience" is just fine. "create artificial superintelligence" is i guess fine to the extent that "superintelligence" is a sensible thing. it is unclear if it is a sensible thing. it's probably much less of a definite thing than "life", like in "create life"? like, we mean sth much smarter than humans i guess. eg if humans are shifting, this will be shifting. seems a bit weird? but maybe it's fine actually, maybe i was sillywrong to complain? i do think that people think way too much that it is some sort of definite thing

However, I'm not sure I know what phase change you have in mind. I'm sure that by default, many important parameters of the world would be importantly different soon after the first AI much more intelligent than current humans is created. For example, I expect that nearby usable energy will be harvested  and turned into work much more efficiently, I expect the complexity of the technological world to be much higher and increasing much faster, I expect the doubling time of the total mass of technological objects to be much smaller, I expect that most mathematical problems humans have stated so far will become very easy to solve, I expect [actions not being guided by the best relevant understanding] to be less existentially problematic (for the AI, compared to how problematic this is for humanity currently), etc.. Still, there is also a sense in which I don't expect there to be a phase change: I expect there to be many important problems which cannot yet be solved. My guess is that it's right to describe the state of affairs as "now many more things can be done easily", but that it isn't right to describe the state of affairs as "now most things that can be done in principle can be done easily".

> Apart from superintelligence being a threshold-concept, there is technological maturity, the kinds of things that can't be significantly improved upon in another 1e10 years of study, but that maybe only take 1-1000 years to figure out for the first time. And one of those things is plausibly efficient use of compute for figuring things out, which gives superintelligence at a given scale of compute. This is in particular the reason to give some credence to software-only singularity, where first AGIs quickly learn to make a shockingly better use of existing compute, so that their capabilities improve much faster than it would take them to build new computing hardware. I think the most likely reason for software-only singularity to not happen is that it's intentionally delayed (by AGIs themselves) because of the danger it creates, rather than because it's technologically impossible.

I agree that the first AGIs would probably by default be able to fairly quickly make shockingly better use of existing compute (at least if they were allowed to do that, which I'd guess they probably will be). I do not agree that **the** reason for this is that technological maturity is a thing, or that technological maturity of minds in particular is a thing — I feel like it's natural to argue for [software-only rapid gains in intelligence being practically feasible] without mentioning technological maturity at all in like the first few hours of arguments; whether software-only rapid gains in intelligence are practically feasible seems imo mostly independent of whether technological maturity of minds is a thing[^1]. Anyway, I agree with this conditional: if technological maturity of fixed-sized minds is a thing (attainable before negentropy runs out in this universe or whatever), then this provides another interesting family of properties of minds 

In fact, I have substantial probability on no remotely "optimal"/"technologically mature" eg Jupiter-sized mind being created by the time negentropy runs out in this universe (or whatever) even if sophisticated minds are around until then, while having $>80\%$ on fairly rapid software-only gains in intelligence being feasible around when the first AI that can solve a millennium prize problem is created (if it is created). 

[^1]: if anything, maybe these even seem weakly negatively correlated, because there being some low cap on how well compute can be assembled into a mind is a special case of technological maturity of minds
