
* ok, so let's say the problem is to make an AI that does some very specific thing, and that also doesn't disrupt the world. for example, making nanobots
	* one immediate issue is that it will have to disrupt the world a lot VIA nanobots! indeed, the nanobot spec will partly go through certain major disruptions to the world, such as [GPUs getting melted but human life continuing]. like, the meaning of nanobots-of-the-correct-variety partly gets pinned down by this desideratum (like, your nanobots need to not be easily destroyed, need to not turn off after 50 years, etc, and you will forget to say all this stuff — the AI will need to track what you are trying to do with these nanobots)
	* a second immediate issue is that it will have to do a lot of other stuff ON THE WAY to nanobots. like, it might want to set up some lab, acquire resources, etc.. it might want to spin up some subagents. this sort of stuff needs to be considered fine i guess, but it will need to be turned off after
	* it will need to have a fine understanding of what sort of disruptions are allowed vs not allowed. killing humans who would turn you off is not allowed, but killing amoebas when building your lab is allowed
* the basic problem is that it's really cursed to make this thing that does this very specific thing! not disrupting stuff! not doing other big stuff, not getting interested in things and wanting to continue investigating, not grabbing resources except those really needed for the task, etc!
* a response: ok but when we've made a capable AI, this AI will be able to stay on target. eg it can actually get to the RH and not get lost in some other analytic number theory fun. so don't capabilities kinda imply precise targeting ability?
	* issue 1: the AI itself being able to handle precise targeting is really different from us humans being able to do that?
	* issue 2: the AI itself might also not know how to avoid getting interested in all sorts of additional stuff?
		* ok but we have trained it to give an output quickly right! if it got interested in lots of other stuff on its way to proving the RH, maybe it wouldn't output its proof, instead deciding to do more analytic number theory? so this developing of other interests is a problem that maybe needs to have been solved? side note: wait isn't training to answer quickly kinda equivalent to training to be turned off quickly? might that create a suicidal AI? ignoring it being potentially immoral-toward-the-AI, would it be a good idea to create an AI that wants to be turned off?
* 