This is a list of insights/updates that seem important, with readings/sources from which I got these.

1. A general thing which had been confusing my reasoning before is that I roughly thought we need to get something smarter than us aligned to solve alignment for us (because we with significant probability don't have enough optimization power to solve alignment ourselves in like $10$ years now), but I think I was maybe sort of confusing the total optimization power (per time?) of a process with its intelligence here — these things come apart in some cases, though I'm still somewhat confused about this, I guess. For instance, arguably, we would be done with alignment if we had a sufficiently good imitator model of Eliezer Yudkowsky and Paul Christiano that does not break under distribution shift, because then we could just run these at 10000x speed and have them solve alignment for us. Potentially, it is reasonable to say that the intelligence of these would just be at our level of intelligence, but the total optimization power per unit of time would be higher. Hmm, on the other hand, in the context in which this came up, I was talking about aligning something smarter than us by $\epsilon$, and I think it might actually have been pretty reasonable to think of aligning a whole process smarter than us by $\epsilon$ (so, given a setup which involves such a speedup, the behavioral imitator itself might be significantly dumber than us). Maybe this update is about realizing the importance of 'free intelligence amplifiers' like speed, and maybe in this framing, it's just a reason to think that aligning something smarter than us by $\epsilon$ is going to be easier than I thought before. I think there is definitely some update here! (I got this from Simon, or at least the update was induced by a discussion with him followed by some thought.)
2. [One might have an inside view model of x, or really just almost one's entire conceptual framework for thinking about x, which suggest p(x)=0.99. But maybe in one's all-things-considered view, one should also account for cases where one's conceptual framework fundamentally fails to carve reality at its joints. I guess some people would call this Knightian uncertainty, though I'm not sure if this is a misuse of terms.](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/tG9BLyBEiLeRJZvX6/communicating-effectively-under-knightian-norms) 