1. To what extent would alien math differ from human math? Here are two reasons to care about this question:
	1. One can ask the same question for science/engineering/technology, thinking, and philosophy, not just for math. And I think the family of analogies presented in Note 3 makes it pretty likely that each of these questions will have the same answer as the question for math.
	2. The extent to which human math/tech/thought/philosophy and alien math/tech/thought/philosophy are orthogonal/different bears centrally on the extent to which the projects humans and aliens would be engaged in (in our respective indefinite unfoldings) would be orthogonal/different (and in particular/addition it bears centrally on the question whether our respective manners of engagement with our projects would be orthogonal/different).
	3. This in turn bears centrally on whether AIs we might create would have very different unfoldings than we would, and on whether humanity has a rich variety of very different potential unfoldings, and on whether each individual humans personally has a rich variety of very different potential unfoldings.^[I think these orthogonality/difference claims are all probably true given a sufficiently long unfolding, though the "characteristic times" of radical difference kicking in are different.]
	4. Maybe this bears significantly on how worried one should be about being replaced by an alien mind? Death will of course remain very bad in any case. But for example, if there were some single path that minds have a strong tendency to get close to with a “fairly short” characteristic time, maybe you’d engage more in life-threatening activities (as long as you’re pretty sure some minds will stick around), because maybe you’d think “you” will “respawn at some (possibly new) default” fairly soon in any case, so there’s effectively a smaller number of actions "lost" if you die? This is compared to e.g. a hyperparameter setting in which your unique character could well be preserved for a long time, in a way you'd consider profoundly worthwhile. On the other extreme, if there were only a fairly short characteristic time to orthogonality, and if you thought that there is only one kind of worthwhile indefinite continuation (even if you don't know which one it is) so you will be increasingly unlikely to be anywhere near that path as time goes on, you might again be more fine with life-threatening activities.
2. It seems likely to me that human math and alien math are pretty radically different, especially if we mean to include methods of mathematical thought in math^[That said, one's explicit math will probably be a fairly close reflection of one's mathematical thought, and the question whether our thinking-technologies would be orthogonal is plausibly equivalent to whether our systems of math would be orthogonal even separately from that, so I don't think this ultimately matters, but it might make the matter clearer anyway.]. I think humans and aliens would plausibly have their own very different thrusts into an extremely large space. Some considerations in support of this:  
	1. As stated already, the question is basically equivalent to whether humans and aliens would have pretty similar technology. It seems plausible that humans and aliens will have really different technology?
	2. Different mathematicians (and different philosophers) do substantively different kinds of mathematics (and, resp., philosophy), and even think substantively differently about "the same things" in math (and in philosophy), in spite of it being much easier for one human (or one culture) to copy a concept (or a way of thinking) from another human than to invent it (and in spite of starting off with fairly similar low-level cognitive structures).
	3. France, Germany, and England have (or at least used to have) substantively different intellectual cultures (including mathematical cultures, I think), again despite having been in a position where it'd be relatively easy to copy from each other (compared to humans and these aliens, anyway).^[some other analogies to consider: to the development of the various indo-european languages from proto-indo-european (or the development of the various romance languages from latin, or whatever other such story you're more familiar with); to the development of all contemporary species from a common ancestor (or of all vertebrates from a common ancestor, or whatever)]
3. Actually, before saying the above differences are so large (even though I did already say that), I would first want to just put these examples in view, saying that these can give us some sense of how different human and alien math might be (for the second and third subitem of the previous item, probably mostly as lower bounds on the difference). But then I do still also want to say that they point toward a large difference, with the caveat that there are probably different reasonable purposes which make [different ways of measuring the difference between human and alien math] appropriate, and these might well give pretty different verdicts.
4. On some counter-considerations:
	1. If we take humans and aliens who have figured out a broadly similar amount of math (but potentially different things and differently) (let's assume this makes sense), I do expect the human and alien bodies of understanding to be open (given understanding and effort, preferably from each side) to a multitude of rich analogies. If put in contact, I'd expect humans and aliens to be able to learn to talk to each other, and to see these many analogies. That said, I'd expect such a process of reconciliation not to look merely like realizing humans and aliens already understood all the same stuff, but to cause/constitute a significant advance over each of their prior understandings (for example, working out a system of analogies could maybe be like working out the Langlands program^[though I should note that I know very little about the Langlands program]).
	2. Given arbitrary time, we might expect both to prove all short propositions, and maybe to eventually even invent all small useful mathematical ideas/gadgets in some sense. But this is a very weak kind of similarity! A picture I have here is of two trees growing into the same very infinite space: for any point $x$, each tree $i$ will reach it at some finite time $t_i(x)$; and still, at any time, the size of the intersection of the trees is tiny compared to the size of the trees, and asymptotically infinitesimal.
5. Here are a few things I haven't investigated properly yet which seem promising for understanding the extent to which human and alien math are radically different better:
	1. To what extent should we expect to see mathematical components which are suboptimal (according to a particular mathematical body's or its developer['s/s'] own lights) get locked in forever (or at least for a very long time)? Maybe it's possible to get into a situation where a conceptual system in math has been built involving some choice (e.g. of some definitions) recognized (after the system had already been built) to probably be worse than some particular other choice, but with it forever remaining not worthwhile to rebuild the system with that other choice anyway (because there are better mathematical things to do)? For this to happen actually-forever, the system using that component probably needs to keep growing forever (intuition: any finite issue will eventually be resolved). Maybe it is almost always the case that if one has recognized that it would probably be better to rebuild a system with a particular different choice, then one is already close to knowing how to do it (because maybe otherwise one wouldn't think the other choice is likely to be better) (note that I'm imagining a situation with a large number potential choices here, in which case identifying any one choice as maybe good is plausibly difficult)? Relatedly, to what extent should we expect technological components recognized to be suboptimal to survive? 
	2. I should think more about historical examples of the same impressive mathematical thing being invented in multiple places. I'd guess that most examples actually had the different places sharing a lot of context (e.g., having the same questions already in mind), and that many examples actually had people inventing somewhat different things that became unified later, but I should do more thinking about historical examples with these questions in mind. Ditto for technologies.
	3. I should clarify to what extent I'm claiming this radical difference between human and alien math comes from divergence in our "mathematical values" vs from a somewhat random (or differently-initialized) walk through math-space even if one maintains the same "mathematical values", or whether it makes sense to make such a distinction.
# mess

* to the extent values just keep diverging in the future, how could one make sense of values in the spacetime block sense at all? must one then say there is radical value change arbitrarily many times? i guess one could say that. but it doesn't feel like anything is getting lost here!

need decomposition 

 I'll be focusing on math in the hope that the picture is clearer for math, but I think an analogy between math and these other fields can then carry the claim over to these other fields. I presented a family of analogies which (I think) can handle this in note 3.

 (like, if there were only some finite system using it, that is, if we had suboptimally implemented something which "interfaces in a particular way" with the rest of math, then one would eventually figure out what the best thing with that interface is ) 

