1. By a diamond maximizer, let’s mean a thing (in this universe) which makes this universe have a very large number of carbon atoms which are covalently bound to 4 other carbon atoms, where by “very large” I should really mean that it in particular [needs to figure out very much in math]/[become arbitrarily advanced technologically]. My actual claim (sorry about the unclear title) is that such a system will after some time “care mostly about” things other than making diamond. (I’m making the distinction that it has to think better because with like 10-1000 years, if we wanted to, we could probably build some stupid fixed-design self-replicating probes which turn planets across the galaxy into diamond, assuming they don’t face resistance from intelligent beings (and one can also imagine sth even further in the direction of gray goo), so it is probably indeed possible to make some fairly large amount of diamond without caring about much else (or even internally caring about making a bunch of diamond, really).)
2. So, our hypothetical diamond maximizer would need to get very far in technologico-scientifico-mathematico-philosophical development, which requires getting very far in developing new ways to think. In other words, it will need to adopt new ways of thinking, new thought-structures, new thought-routines.
3. By default, new thinking-structures probably come with "new values". Being paranoid enough about the process of developing new thinking-structures to not have them come with "new values" probably cripples you, so you probably won't be making very much diamond this way.
4. In other words, to make a lot of diamond, you should probably do things which involve also starting to care about things other than diamond.
5. After doing this for a while, you will probably mostly be caring about things other than making diamond, instead having a variety of other interests that have grown out of your initial interest in making a lot of diamond. I should really be making some quantitative claim, maybe about how much diamond you'll be making before you must mostly be having other interests or something, but that seems too hard for now.
6. That such an attempted diamond maximizer will be developing other values seems especially clear if we include its more timeful cares (as opposed to only its cares about what the universe should eventually look like) among its values — in particular, wanting to make progress on particular intellectual projects, wanting to improve its thinking in various particular ways — which seems plausibly warranted by the common meaning of the word "care". If we want to force a distinction between terminal and instrumental values here, I think it's plausible we should see it as developing some terminal cares having to do with improving its understanding, not just instrumental ones. 
7. One factor probably limiting the amount of diamond that gets made by any mind is that it probably won't be the case that "make diamond" will be an answer to very many questions of the form "what should I do to X?".
8. All this said, we could certainly have a growing mind make some decent amount of diamond. We could maybe even have it put a meaningful amount of effort into making diamond "practically forever"?
9. We can get some lower bounds on what's possible from thinking about what humanity could do, e.g.:
	1. Humanity could well decide to turn some planets into diamond for fun or something.
	2. Maybe we could imagine humanity spending a century focusing on developing diamond-based technologies, getting us into a position where "make diamond" will maybe be an answer to lots of questions of the form "what should I do to X?" for a long time?
	3. We could also maybe sorta imagine some group of humans setting "make a bunch of diamond" as some sort of ultimate challenge for themselves, and while I doubt this aim could last indefinitely with them still around and still becoming smarter, it would maybe not be so utterly crazy to envisage a powerful such group arising when humanity is technologico-scientifico-mathematico-philosophically advanced enough that these humans could make and launch some simple nanobot-probe-things which (assuming no intelligent intervention) would repurpose like more than half of the usual matter in our galaxy into diamond, with these probes wiping out all humans and indeed making a bunch of diamond (maybe we should imagine most of humanity getting into this diamond thing for this step to look plausible). So it's certainly possible that a lot of diamond gets made.