1. I think that there is a lot of tension in a conception of a worthwhile future in which humanity is no longer remotely close to being a "primary thinker/understander" in the world — i.e., with another system which is distinct and separate from humanity and much more intelligent/capable than humanity present in the world (let's say it is also not very tightly boxed — it is really doing stuff in the world). This includes the conception of a good future with a non-human AI sovereign which just "has human values", the conception of a good future with an AI acting as some sort of guardian/caretaker to humanity, the conception of a good future with non-human corrigible AI, the conception of a good future in which humanity coexists with an AI which is largely indifferent toward us (maybe with a [gains from trade] type hope), and similar conceptions but with a multitude of AIs. Many previous notes on this list already point at some tensions in such conceptions; this note aims to bring these thoughts together.
	1. I think these tensions bring the conception of such a future close to being incoherent, but I do not claim to possess anything approaching a crisp argument that it is incoherent. What conception would I even be calling incoherent? It's not like I have some clear picture in mind of what it is for humanity to remain the top understander. And there are surely lots of profoundly weird profoundly good futures, and certainly ones involving top understanders that are much more artificial than current humans/humanity! But I'll try to say something about this distinction in the next notes.
	2. Anyway, even is such conceptions were not outright incoherent, I think these tensions point to a good future of this kind being immensely difficult to arrange to have happen and immensely unlikely to transpire by default. This provides reason to strive to have humanity remain the top thinker in our world, plausibly with it remaining wrong to create some non-human more capable system forever (in particular, over having humans continue to become smarter), but minimally continuing with humans as top understanders at least until we've understood relevant matters a lot better. (In any case, we would of course "ideally" leave ourselves the option to decide to lift the prohibition on creating any non-human super-human system^[where "ideally" assumes we would make such decisions sensibly in the future].)
2. First, let's set some reference points:
	1. We could imagine a future in which something like a big evolution [which is completely independent from the big evolution which produced humans] gets started in our cosmic neighborhood,^[such as maybe one of the ones happening at scaling labs or, in a slightly different sense, maybe the one currently carried out by the ML field, or maybe a different one entirely] develops faster than humanity, swiftly bypasses us and wipes us out, and then I guess some stuff determined by it happens in the universe after. I will assert without proof that this thing is much closer in terms of its worth to a completely empty universe than to the option below.^[Maybe the ethically relevant notion of “existence” is such that we can say quite literally that such futures do not exist — after all, they would be in a universe which doesn’t have us in it (anymore) — a universe which we couldn’t touch. But I'm speculating here — I don't understand what's going on here that clearly at present.]
	2. We could imagine a future where "the human project" continues for a long time, with humanity figuring out very much, growing much more skillful and intelligent, facing new challenges with care. Humanity has many short-term and long-term projects and interests, as do I and you and other individual humans, and these continue, and we pick new projects later, and, generally, this system of human activities lives on. There are things which suck currently, like each person only living for at most about 100 years, but we can fix these things ourselves. I think such a future could be profoundly good.
		1. I don't mean to say that such a future is a definite single thing, nor that doing well here is straightforward — I think there is a very wide variety of possibilities here, and that one can do much better or much worse, and that there is a lot of complicated navigating for humanity to do along such a path. I will say a bit more about this in the next 3 notes.
3. Now, let us try to imagine futures where humanity is no longer anywhere close to being a primary understander — centrally, because a super-humanity cognitive system (or multiple, in parallel or in sequence) foomed (i.e., improved its (or their) thinking) for a while without humanity going along for that ride as a partner of sustainably similar intellectual caliber. I'll be making claims about the distribution of such futures as it appears at present. I think it'd be profoundly weird for things to go well for humanity in such a scenario — I think almost all such futures are pretty close (in goodness) to a future with just an independent big evolution which wipes out humanity. With sadness, I've given up on giving a systematic analysis/justification of this claim in (the present version of) these notes, but here are some central considerations (this is in large part recapitulating points from earlier notes):
	1. clarifying my position on what the world looks like when humanity is no longer a primary understander: I pretty strongly expect the primary understander(s) to be going about their own non-human affairs in such worlds — to be working on their own various projects which have little to do with humans, to be continuing their own forever-foom(s); and I expect this to leave little room in the universe for humans. 
	2. It seems very weird for humans to still be around on our own foom in such a world — it will be a world of/[guided by] non-human purposes, in which humans cannot be playing much of a role if we are no longer competitive understanders. Like, as an AI that relates in skill/intelligence/understanding to us as we relate to ants, wouldn't it be profoundly weird to see some significant role in the world for silly little humans/humanity that cannot really contribute to anything?
		1. Humans have been sticking around in the world less because of some grand human design which makes human stick around in the world, but because humans have continued to have roles to play in some sort of vague totality of activities (like, "in the economy" and "in culture") — in particular and centrally, as thinkers and doers. If humans are no longer competitive understanders, then the totality of activities will no longer have these human-shaped holes, and there not being "a place" for humans in the world bodes ill for humans sticking around. Like, we can easily imagine firms and states and religions and cultures getting out-competed, losing their appeal (so far, to humans, but that was primarily relevant just because they were entities in a world of human purposes), no longer having something sufficient to provide, no longer having a sufficient role in the world, and passing away. Having something to contribute, each human has been more safe from "the totality of activities" "losing interest" in  them in this way. In a world of alien purposes, where humans have been vastly superseded in understanding and are thus no longer sufficiently fit to participate in pretty much any projects, humans have lost this important safeguard. This bodes ill for humans sticking around.
			1. Generally, good things are not here just for "their own sake"; good things are also largely here to serve other purposes. People largely get educated for financial reasons, but people getting educated is also profoundly good. Thus far, it has been sensible to invest some significant amount in humans getting educated or in humans doing research even if one just cares about GDP per capita; once humans are no longer competitive, this reason for these profoundly good things is lost.
		2. One might have a sense that we will surely muddle along, just like we always have. But unfortunately the “right generalization” of this is that the world will surely muddle along, as it always has; unfortunately, humans/humanity could easily be left out of the world. Indeed, we have stayed in this great muddling-along so far largely due to a factor that will go away if we are no longer the smartest/[most capable] entity around.
	3. Suppose half of humanity magically disappeared, and the remaining half foom enough to relate in intelligence to its current version as we relate to ants, and then they discover a planet in another galaxy onto which the other half of humanity has just been teleported — they encounter the other half in their current state. 
	4. 
	5. It is profoundly weird to imagine human values being separated from human understanding and still [being anywhere-near-properly in place in the world]/[guiding action/life in a way that makes things worthwhile].
		1. There is the following view: “human values” are some sort of thing guiding life and this is making things worthwhile; why couldn’t we construct another very non-human system which is still just as guided by human values, and have things still be worthwhile? And yes, activity being guided by human values is indeed presently making things worthwhile, but it is doing so in the context of it being the activity of humans, and it would by default not be doing so if another very non-human thing were around instead. For example, humans sometimes try to become friends with others or to teach others or to understand something and all these can make up a profoundly good world of activities, whereas random minds trying to “become friends” with other random minds or “teaching” other random minds or “understanding things” would only make up a non-profound world.^[To explain my usage of quotes here: I’m trying to point here at activities which would be analogous for these random minds, imagining a case where we can make some sense of that, while reminding us that these will still be very alien.] To say this in another way:
	6. There will indefinitely be many major decisions to make about the way forward; these decisions will not be made in a human way if the primary [understander isn't]/[understanders aren't] human. Like, many things will be happening in the future — history isn't going to end. These things should be navigated by human values+understanding, on all levels, with full force.
	7. Some seem to get a great deal of optimism about [a future where AIs foom (leaving humans behind in intelligence)] from observing current large language models "answer ethics questions better"^[or producing text in response to ethics questions which looks more like that produced by a PR-trained 2024 SF techlib :)] than a random person; a response to this:
		1. If these AIs foom (leaving humans far behind in intelligence), this clearly isn't going to be anything like humanity's foom — these systems are clearly not very much like humanity or like humans. Like, clearly, they do not think very much like humanity or like individual humans.
			1. For instance, if these systems or something that grows out of them were to start forging its own concepts/thinking-structures, the concepts/thinking-structures it would forge have very little to do with the concepts humanity/humans would forge on our own foom. To begin with, even though they produce human-like text, they don't have human concepts remotely resembling how humans have human concepts, sitting in their minds/"minds" remotely like human concepts sit in human minds. Basically no structure in human minds could remotely properly be making its way into a pretrained language model (and then not into a model trained with RL either) — a pretrained model probably instead has something like a vast collection of shallow things^[what this looks like: [next video frame prediction models do not have any "physical mechanism" implemented properly](https://youtu.be/Y5GYqeCCu5Y); [next game frame prediction models do not have any "game mechanic" implemented properly](https://gamengen.github.io/)]
 https://gamengen.github.io/) There are some interesting relations between our concepts and the concepts/"concepts" these systems have, but these do not get one anywhere close to these systems having the concepts we have remotely as we have them.
		2. a somewhat less important objection: If this tech stack is to overtake humans in research ability, by the time it does, there will probably be much less of an emphasis on the pretrained LLM component and much more of an emphasis on the RL component than there was for a while before 2024, which tends to push them even further away from being remotely human-like. It also seems plausible that large language models (even with currently known/salient RL and search components or whatever) without some significant different/new ideas would not be what overtakes humans in research ability.^[Yes, you will be able to run some big search for ML setups using these models (which could look like models doing ML research), and at some scale this big search would presumably indeed find something which overtakes humanity. But like, you can also run a big search which just tries all possible programs in order or something, which would also work at some scale, but that scale is very far out of reach. My guess is that a search/evolution which just "fairly thoughtlessly" tries "combinations of existing ideas" would plausibly only find a thing which overtakes humanity at some scale which is still pretty far out of reach in ML, that this remains true even if there is some fairly thoughtless search of better ways to search also occurring (etc.), and that this is a fair way to think about what will be done with LLMs.]
4. Now, let us try to imagine good futures in which humanity is no longer a primary understander, but the autonomous top understander is serving us or "serving human values".
	1. Many things will be happening in the future — history isn't going to end. These things should be navigated by human values+understanding.
	2. Still, maybe the system would take some sort of indefinite interest in humanity?
		1. Idk, maybe there'd be like unimaginably weird history exhibits involving humans, and some experiments on brains, and some simulations of human history, and maybe there'd be a "the culture of 1 month after the first super-humanity system got made memorial tournament in optimally pleasing humans" held every once in a while.
5. Maybe there are fine futures in which humanity is no longer remotely close to being a primary/competitive understander, and the AI doesn't really [care about humanity/humans]/[want to serve humanity/humans], but we can coexist in this universe anyway? We could call this "the economist's future".
	1. If the universe were to be split into two decently big thereafter-non-interacting parts, with humanity in one and the AI in the other, then that could make for a fine future. Note that it's probably strictly worse than not creating AI though, though I’d guess that getting to do stuff in just half the universe is only a tiny bit worse. Anyway, the point I'm making with this is that I'm not saying it matters intrinsically that humanity figures things out "first" in "our universe" or something. If there were a device which would very cheaply let one teleport a copy of the-solar-system-with-humanity-but-without-AI to a random location in some highly inexhaustibly large space, then maybe we could teleport away and “coexist” just fine. 
	2. Unfortunately:
		1. we have to live on the same atoms, and we compete for resources (like sunlight and other sources of energy), and humans need certain environmental conditions (like an atmosphere with a certain chemical makeup and temperature);^[I haven't thought about this that carefully, but it doesn't seem that implausible to me that the future has a genuinely infinite amount of energy available for work (yes, even knowing some statmech, though I'm open to more compelling statmech arguments (and other kinds of arguments)) — in significant part because one just needs there to be a single hack which works (and, as mentioned in a footnote on an earlier note, every existentially quantified statement (except the negation of this statement) is true :) ) — however, even if that's true, I doubt it'll help us anywhere-near-sufficiently, as there will still be local competitions we'll need to be competitive in.]
		2. if humanity is no longer close to a primary/competitive understander, and the AI doesn't really [care about humanity/humans]/[want to serve humanity/humans], but we can coexist in this universe anyway? We could call this "the economist's future".
	1. If the universe were to be split into two decently big thereafter-non-interacting parts, with humanity in one and the AI in the other, then that could make for a fine future. Note that it's probably strictly worse than not creating AI though, though I’d guess that getting to do stuff in just half the universe is only a tiny bit worse. Anyway, the point I'm making with this is that I'm not saying it matters intrinsically that humanity figures things out "first" in "our universe" or something. If there were a device which would very cheaply let one teleport a copy of the-solar-system-with-humanity-but-without-AI to a random location in some highly inexhaustibly large space, then maybe we could teleport away and “coexist” just fine. 
	2. Unfortunately:
		1. we have to live on the same atoms, and we compete for resources (like sunlight and other sources of energy), and humans need certain environmental conditions (like an atmosphere with a certain chemical makeup and temperature);
		2. if humanity is no longer close to a primary understander, we won't be able to fight/pay for ourselves getting to live "on" our atoms and having resources and suitable environmental conditions — in particular, since in such a future it will be easy to spin up non-human systems which can perform $\approx$any economic task better along $\approx$every dimension than a human (including consuming less energy than a human), humans would never be able to "earn resources by working";^[in such a future, we might not even be able to understand what it would look like to fight/pay for resources — like, the "economy" then might be as opaque to humans as our own present economy is to ants]
		3. if the AI doesn't care about us, we will soon not be the best users of these atoms and resources in the eyes of the AI, and it will not find it worthwhile to make it so environmental conditions suit us;
		4. so we don't stick around.
		5. If there were an existing legal system which supposedly granted humans/humanity a bunch of resources and rights for a while, this wouldn't be best for the artificial systems that would (in such a future) be immensely more capable and powerful than humans, and so this legal system wouldn't remain in force. Also, even if some parts of the existing legal-economic system did stick around, the system needs to be updated with human interests in mind for things to remain good for humans, which is not going to happen if humans can't fight/pay for it.^[And not only would we not be able to fight/pay for a system which is fine for us — in a world in which we are no longer competitive thinkers, we'd not even be able to come up with an adequate system.] For example, human-wrecking persuasion is totally a thing — it would be totally easy for a much smarter entity to persuade humans out of our resources. (And it’s not the case that one can patch some finite number of such problems ahead of time and be fine. There will be an infinitely rich variety of such battles to fight, and we need to be competitive understanders to stand a chance in these battles.)
		6. This is all on top of the following much more obvious thing: if there are some resources whose supply is finite (like maybe energy-which-could-be-used-to-do-work or negentropy or space(time) (though this could be stretching the notion of a resource)), then if this future transpires, even if humanity somehow gets some decent amount of resources (which we wouldn't, but setting that aside), we are going to get a minuscule fraction of what we could have gotten — and this plausibly matters a lot.
	3. Okay but maybe we could be fine if the AI sorta doesn't care about us and we can't fight for ourselves because of some decision/game-theoretic thing along the lines of "you should be nice to your parents so your children are nice to you"?
		1. Briefly: it seems unlikely that anything close to what we'd understander, we won't be able to fight/pay for ourselves getting to live "on" our atoms and having resources and suitable environmental conditions — in particular, since in such a future it will be easy to spin up non-human systems which can perform $\approx$any economic task better along $\approx$every dimension than a human (including consuming less energy than a human), humans would never be able to "earn resources by working";^[in such a future, we might not even be able to understand what it would look like to fight/pay for resources — like, the "economy" then might be as opaque to humans as our own present economy is to ants]
		3. if the AI doesn't care about us, we will soon not be the best users of these atoms and resources in the eyes of the AI, and it will not find it worthwhile to make it so environmental conditions suit us;
		4. so we don't stick around.
		5. If there were an existing legal system which supposedly granted humans/humanity a bunch of resources and rights for a while, this wouldn't be best for the artificial systems that would (in such a future) be immensely more capable and powerful than humans, and so this legal system wouldn't remain in force. Also, even if some parts of the existing legal-economic system did stick around, the system needs to be updated with human interests in mind for things to remain good for humans, which is not going to happen if humans can't fight/pay for it.^[And not only would we not be able to fight/pay for a system which is fine for us — in a world in which we are no longer competitive thinkers, we'd not even be able to come up with an adequate system.] For example, human-wrecking persuasion is totally a thing — it would be totally easy for a much smarter entity to persuade humans out of our resources.
		6. This is all on top of the following much more obvious thing: if there are some resources whose supply is finite (like maybe energy-which-could-be-used-to-do-work or negentropy or space(time) (though this could be stretching the notion of a resource)), then if this future transpires, even if humanity somehow gets some decent amount of resources (which we wouldn't, but setting that aside), we are going to get a minuscule fraction of what we could have gotten — and this might matter a great deal.
	4. Okay but maybe we could be fine if the AI sorta doesn't care about us and we can't fight for ourselves because of some decision/game-theoretic thing along the lines of "you should be nice to your parents so your children are nice to you"?
		1. Briefly: it seems unlikely that anything close to what we'd want comes out of this.

6. First, it's sorta nonsense to speak of the alignment problem as a thing to be solved. There will probably be indefinitely many rich new challenges around how to proceed, which need to be met with full force, not somehow pre-apprehended.
7. 
8. We could also imagine 
9. To recapitulate the tensions:
10. When becoming smarter, humanity will change a lot. Hopefully, we can continue our current projects, and we can be the entity finding and choosing and working on new projects in the future.
11. I'll go from 
12. So, to have a good future, all advanced understanding in the world should be humanity's.
13. However, this advanced understanding should be growing — this might be obvious to some, but I've included the next note as a case for this. So, humanity should be understanding more, becoming more intelligent, skillful, capable.
14. So, it would be profoundly bizarre for the future to be worthwhile without humanity still being the smartest thing around. I want to go from this to saying that humanity should just be becoming smarter and more skillful, and we just shouldn't build a distinct cognitive system which is smarter than us, maybe ever (though I think we should only make this be a tentative decision if possible — I'd like it to remain possible for us to change our mind on this). But maybe this is a broken inference? I will accept the inference for the next 3 notes (note 21, 22, 23), and then return to an analysis of potential holes in this inference in note 24.
15. 

16. It is very hard to imagine "human values" being "lived out" by anything other than humanity.
17. If humans are no longer anywhere close to being a top cosmos-understander, then 


# mess


anyway, here are some considerations bearing on whether you'd uplift ants:
* instead of uplifting ants, there are many other things for you to work on, and many other ways to use the resources that the ant uploads would use. in particular, you might prefer to create other beings instead of creating super-ants — and wouldn't it be surprising for super-ants to be the best beings to create? is there a great privilege granted to super-ants over other possible minds by the fact they exist already?^[i don't actually want to claim that this privilege must be explicit — it could also come about from wanting to relate to things, or something — but still] we see some privilegings in human society which one could think of as privileging already existing things but i think that's probably not a main underlying thing actually, and instead one should think of those privilegings as coming from various other things (eg, utilitarians can easily also be in favor of there being punishments for killing people but there not being punishments for failing to make people or something), many of which are not going to be present in the ant-uplifting case
* even if you upload ants, you might want to shape the ant foom instead of letting the ants foom without you intervening (minimally, eg you might want to intervene when the "ants" are about to wipe themselves out)
* you might not want to let the ants foom to your level, because then maybe they'd fuck things up. indeed, if you were uplifted right now, you'd probably be careful about uplifting others to your level, because they might end the world with AI, right


but couldn’t an economist’s future involve humans staying competitive also? note that this is out of scope for now (but it seems tough)

a good future involves humans fitting into a world of human purposes, not into a world of alien purposes


a thing leaving us alone entirely is indeed possible (at least for a time) — we can not build agi. certainly splitting the universe in half with a thing would be fine, if that were possible 
you might think there is a thing which 
the good thing here looks a lot like leaving us alone, with maybe some kinds of interaction. it'd be great to have a thing which cures cancer for us, if that were possible

basically, i think that 

here i think i need to give the argument that humanity should be the smartest thing around. there's like a conception where there's some other system 

then i should say that i'll go from this to it indefinitely being a bad idea to build any generally intelligent ai system, but this is not



Ok, so let's say we agree that humanity should go on to 

7. Then, we can imagine a future 
8. So, 
	1. Broadly, I just strongly 
9. Maybe we could imagine good futures in which humanity is no longer a primary understander, the AI doesn't serve us