1. One should be understanding more, becoming more intelligent, skillful, capable, because:
	1. Basically all our pursuits would benefit from that.
	2. Many of our projects are precisely about figuring stuff out, understanding something better, seeing more clearly, experiencing more fully.
	3. More generally, understanding more and becoming more skillful/capable/intelligent are central projects (for $\approx$all advanced minds, and for humans/humanity in particular).
	4. A future without very much growth would be small; it'd be tragic to have such a small future. There is a great deal of value in our lives now, but it wouldn't be so worthwhile on top of that to have lives just like ours repeated very many times.
	5. There will be challenges in the future that require us to understand things to handle. After a point, these challenges will be largely created by us; more understanding also brings more challenges faster. Still, striving to understand more doesn't merely speed up what would have happened anyway. New challenges are also created by processes which are [stupider, more brute-force-search-y, more soulless, less guided by reason, less philosophical, less intellectual], so striving to understand more probably pushes the balance toward proceeding more thoughtfully (as opposed to merely speeding things up — though it certainly also has a major component of speeding things up). "Sapere aude!", not "accelerate!"!
	6. Generally, many of our projects are sorta on a schedule set by other processes which wouldn’t be sped up as much by us striving to understand more.[^1]
	7. If we go faster, we will get more done.[^2]
	8. I'm also somewhat hopeful that having somewhat more understanding could make humanity more likely to think that one should be careful about adopting/creating new thinking-systems. A major reason I'm hopeful here is that I think it is true that we should be more careful about adopting/creating new thinking-systems, and it seems plausible that becoming smarter would lead to us realizing this imo-true thing and acting with it in mind.
2. That said, one can certainly reasonably object to some thought(-relevant)-structure being adopted by arguing that many profound projects might lose their significance if it is adopted. Suspecting that your way of life might be radically disrupted if you were to $X$ is certainly a good pro tanto reason against $X$-ing, and an excellent pro tanto reason to be very careful about $X$-ing. So, I'm certainly in favor of being extremely careful here, even if what's going on is still well-described as humanity adopting new ways of thinking.
	1. Generally, when a new thought-technology might lead to a [way of life]/[constellation of activities]/[portfolio of projects] going out "not of its own accord", I think we should be very worried. For example, if uploading yourself and the many new forms of self-reprogramming it facilitates (or even just "adding compute") were to be invented, even with some developing system of restrictions in place which somehow prevent proceeding completely carelessly, I think it makes sense to be very worried about how the fastest-fooming people treat slower-fooming people or people that decide not to foom in this way or be uploaded at all. Whenever going on living a particular life is made extremely difficult for a person by a potential technological development, we should be concerned about that. I think it even makes a great deal of sense to worry about, like, the internet contributing a lot to the decline of many cultures and communities. This isn't to say that such developments are to then definitely be avoided — I'm acknowledging that there are very legitimate concerns here, without saying these settle the matter. For instance, pretty much any scenario with something like mind-upload-humanity proceeding for a while would be much better than humanity wiping itself out entirely by letting pretty much entirely non-human AI foom. That said, if there were a global AGI ban, we should plausibly also ban mind uploads.
3. Generally, "which thought-structures should be adopted?" and "which thought-development-processes should we speed up and contribute to, and which ones should we curtail and fight against?" are infinite questions, to be worked on (hopefully by humanity) indefinitely. I'll provide some thoughts on how thinking should grow in the next few notes.

[^1]: This is in part a better version of item 1 on the present sublist.
[^2]: This is in part a restatement of the previous item.
