1. Let's say we just want humanity to proceed. But isn't humanity proceeding in any case? Why must we do anything for humanity to proceed?
2. When I say human activities should continue, I do not mean this in the empty sense that this thinking-world-process should carry on (as it indeed surely does whatever we do) — I mean some rich thing (which I'll try to say a bit more about in this note).
3. While I want our work on our projects to continue, I certainly simultaneously want us to be very open to change; any good path forward probably involves creating indefinitely many novel mind-structures, which probably need to come with "new values" to some extent. I think it would be profoundly sad if we never came to think in currently-nearly-inconceivable ways, if we never came to work on currently-nearly-unimaginable projects, etc..^[In this sentence, I've equivocated between this being "bad in itself" vs just very correlated with badness. My present not-so-worked-out position on this is some unclear combination of "there's a great deal of both" and "I might want to criticize a philosophical system which asks me to make this distinction in this context".]
4. That said, we should have rich judgment about how to proceed. We can distinguish between a person learning math and being somewhat different, vs committing a fractional suicide by taking psychedelics, vs committing suicide and being "replaced" by a random other person, vs committing suicide and being "replaced" by a random alien.
	1. Why would it be bad if you died? I think the/a central good answer is that there's a bunch of stuff you'd like to do, which you couldn't do if you died. There's a bunch of stuff humanity would like to do, also, so it's a profoundly bad idea for humanity to die, also.
	2. If you magically jumped out of existence and got replaced by a random smarter person, a very significant thing would have happened (at least according to your sense of things)! There's a real distinction between this happening and you learning and thinking and becoming smarter yourself.^[That said, I don’t know if one should or does already hope for anything in the very very long term. A person can certainly live very much longer than people do now, but there is also a real tension between not dying and [living on]/growing. Maybe one can hope to have one’s work be built on indefinitely.] I want us to learn and think and become smarter ourselves.
5. So, let's imagine that the future (at some particular future time (interval), say) contains a mind (or constellation of minds) $M$ whose existence was caused by us, directly or indirectly (via intermediate descendants), intentionally or unintentionally. So, $M$ will have been causally spawned by us, but what does it take for $M$ to be a good/legitimate successor?
6. One reasonable brief answer: well, perhaps $M$ should still be us --- it should still be humanity. But it's worth trying to provide a much clearer answer than that (and perhaps one that is somewhat different).^[This seems very related to making sense of personal identity, to making sense of who we are, or maybe instead of deciding whom to be.] Answering this question is probably an infinite endeavor, but here's a provisional beginning of an answer:
	1. $M$'s understanding/[point of view]/values should have developed out of our current understanding/[point of view]/values — not just in the trivial sense of being somewhat causally influenced by it, but by some rich self-conscious process marked by care, with rich relations between $M$'s understanding/[point of view]/values and ours.
	2. $M$ should be interested in our point of view, and to be able to take out point of view.
	3. $M$ should look to us-now with our current aspirations for some kinds of guidance, or at least think about us with some care and concern. I would even hope that it sometimes looks back to us for some kinds of guidance on how to think, despite having seen and figured out much more than we have — a bit like stare decisis (but much better, of course, always better).
	4. $M$ should have some sense that [we are]/[it is] doing what [we were]/[it was] meant to be doing all along.
	5. We (humanity-now and $M$) should be engaged in many common projects.
	6. At each time, $M$ should have some sense of a narrative (or many narratives) which they and previous versions (including humanity-now) can be rightly seen as having participated in (or at least as having made a decent effort given their devastating ignorance).
	7. $M$ should be interested in figuring out what's good/worthwhile/kind/cool, in sorta the same sense of those words that we have now, and to be guided by this in its conduct in sorta the sense we are guided by this.
	8. $M$ should even sorta rebel against our previous aspirations/projects, too, though probably while taking these seriously and with a sense of improving on the same more fundamental thing, and really I should be more careful about telling it that :).
7. Maybe most importantly, I would like humanity to proceed thoughtfully, with a lot of care and thought put into how to proceed, probably indefinitely approaching that problem with all our understanding and skill (as opposed to there being some point after which it becomes adequate to approach this problem with some understood pre-determined protocol). Obviously, this is not some sort of definitive solution to the problem — I think there is infinitely much interesting work to be done here. Going forward, we should continue doing this work and be guided by it in how to go forward.


# messapendix

Let's imagine that the future (at some particular future time (interval), say) contains a mind $M$ whose existence was caused by us, directly or indirectly (via intermediate descendants), intentionally or unintentionally.\footnote{It seems likely to me that the future will in fact contain such a mind, at least for the next, let's say, $10^6$ years, but let us put aside this question (for now) to ask a different question.} So, $M$ will have been causally spawned by us, but what does it take for $M$ to be our legitimate successor? One reasonable brief answer is: well, perhaps $M$ should still be us --- it should still be humanity. But it's worth trying to provide a much clearer answer than that, and perhaps one that is somewhat different. All this is very related to the problem of making sense of personal identity, to the problem making sense of who we are, and/or maybe the problem of deciding whom to be. I should clarify that I think this is plausibly the sort of question that will continue to be worked out better or further clarified/decided indefinitely (or at least until humanity is still around, and then again from another perspective by whatever mind is around after) --- it might always feel to us that committing to any very clear answer to this question would be premature and limiting --- not the sort of question which we will develop some ultimately clear answer to (or decision on) by some time. Still, I can offer some preliminary/tentative criteria on a good successor $M$: