1. I'd like to respond to one particular manner of thinking that I'm small-minded in arguing for a human future. I think it's possible for a decent person to read the words in notes 19–22 and hear "let's create a future with human characteristics!" and to be like "seems pretty small/cringe — what are these human characteristics that we must care so much about filling the universe with?", and then maybe present me with questions like "is it that it matters so much that there are creatures with various human organs in the future? or maybe it matters so much that there are many human brains with such and such levels of dopamine? or maybe some big enough conjunction of these things must start to matter to us so very much? or maybe you can't characterize it so precisely at present, but you are imagining some such characterization being there?". A few things in response to this:
	1. First, when we force ourselves to think of matters so much "from the outside" — when we make everything be so much about making the universe contain some certain stuff — then I am note entirely unsympathetic to things starting to look small/cringe (though then not to only the things you could take me as advocating for looking small/cringe, but to a great variety of things looking such). I think one thing that's going on here is that things which one can see so very clearly from the outside and places where criteria for goodness are so clearly figured out are often no longer the best things for one to be interested in (and often without so much goodness compared to other activities at that point at all), as one can then already be interested in some much cooler activities happening where one cannot see so clearly yet. But more importantly, I think the given smallness objection misses that I'm not saying we ought to be so interested in these things from the outside — that we ought to be so interested in making a bunch of some certain genre of stuff in particular — but that we (individual humans, but also humanity) are(/is) already engaged in various endeavors, with a rich variety of interests "from the inside". If we do look at ourselves from the outside, we will hopefully see various ways to do better, but also hopefully go "wow, pretty based — I'm interested in seeing where this is going", but we probably indeed shouldn't go "it would be so profound for these characteristics to be replicated many times".
	2. Second, the thing I'm wanting involves a lot of looking back at history and going "wow, that was so small/silly" arbitrarily many times — a lot of going arbitrarily much further than one had before — but I do want (us) to actually be going somewhere, not for some random process somewhere we can't see doing something unintelligible.
	3. We could imagine having an analogous conversation about whether it is so small/cringe to want to do various things instead of being getting killed and being replaced by a random other human ("does it matter to you so that the future has someone with a nose just like yours in it? does it matter to you that the future has someone with just your current concept of a set?"), or about whether it is so small/cringe for a culture to be engaged in something ("is it so important that the future has people eating this particular food? or that this particular poem keeps getting read?").
	4. Last, I can additionally imagine hearing from such a person something about how it instead "roughly speaking really matters that the future has a lot of mathematical understanding" or something, and then I'd want to say that the thing like this which one might be able to get behind (though probably as one thing among many) is already a rich thing, and not a thing which a random mind pursues by default.
2. It's just profoundly cool to keep growing immensely as a cosmos-understander (and self-understander and world-maker, etc.), actually. What's wrong with continuing to raise ourselves out of our immaturity (forever)?