
* the outer criterion of evolution doesn't explicitly have a regularization term (ie it is just inclusive genetic fitness or whatever) but energy expenditure acts as a sorta regularizer anyway. keeping cell energy expenditure fixed, it would be like some increasing function of the number of cells. one could say that it is some increasing function of the number of parts
* mostly when a part has been invented, it sticks around (should check this!) (the appendix is a counterexample probably)
* the same idea gets used all over. the same cell type gets used in many places, for many things. each cell has ribosomes. many examples!
* are you incentivized to build stuff that helps you evolve better? on the one hand it seems likely that in the story of humans being created, such innovations were quite important (eg sexual reproduction). on the other hand it seems like feedback loops should be really long for this, and so individual fitness advantages from getting such things should be small. i think it's plausible that these indeed strictly speaking don't really have huge fitness advantages. but if you have such a thing happen to be built (either in an individual or small group that then goes off to do its own thing, or an entire species; probably for some different reason), then a lot of structure can be downstream of that anyway! like, maybe now you're a better builder for a long time. these things not built for building better can make themselves felt in history mostly by making better building possible anyway! like, it's plausible that an innovation causes there to be a lot more structure now, while still not giving a fitness advantage locally from better structure-building ability (tho probably giving a fitness advantage for some other reason)