it's good to be able to look at the world somewhat teleologically. in this note, i give some broad strokes of such a picture.

* there are questions/problems/tasks/purposes and answers/solutions/plans/technologies meeting them.
* these come at very many levels. eg when you understand a sentence, each word presents its own problem of putting sounds together into a sensible unit, and then there is a problem of grokking a meaning of the entire sentence from those; and then, there a problem of constructing a coherent mental picture from a bunch of sentences.
* solutions to problems are tentative. they can be called into question by other problems. eg when you hear a sentence you can mishear a word initially but then correct it to make the entire sentence make sense
* a problem is given by something like a verifier. in the clearest case, a verifier is a program that accepts or rejects proposed solutions, or a boolean circuit. 
	* no, i think this is usually false. it's more like there are verifiers trying to verify a property, without the property being ultimately defined by the verifiers (like, usually, the verifiers can be wrong). but there is then a question of how problems are specified. one example is given by problems stated in language, which are perhaps like stated math problems; we can understand a mathematical problem separately from its verifiers and there imo are sensible math problems without verifiers (for example, giving the length of the shortest proof of 0=1 in PA or saying NO if there is no such proof). there can and often are also verifiers. but typically there is a gap between the truth and these verifiers. or well, sometimes there is a sort of good verifier, eg a replacement car part might be verified by driving the car for a year with that part without problems; however, i think this is less like having some specific verifier system, but having specified a criterion in language that can then be investigated, i think. intuitively, a specific car tester system you give could be hacked much more than the criterion. my best guess is that it ultimately comes down to sth more like a way of coping continuing to work, and i mean this not in a value-barren sense of some sort of stuff continuing, but in a value-laden sense of things continuing well. like, at least when judging what your concrete verifiers should be doing (say, whether you should intuitively consider some new weird car-like thing a car), you are ultimately asking sth like "what would work best here?"
* a question: where do new problems come from? potential answer: in many cases they are called into existence by other problems, as auxiliaries
	* in particular, there are some problems that are very hard to exhaust. for example, you can improve a textbook on a subject basically indefinitely (i guess this is technically false if there is a length constraint, but it is true for all practical purposes). you can always be a better friend.
* our notion of each thing contains (and is partly constituted by) understanding how to use that thing, understanding how the thing can be involved in our plans, knowledge of its potential purposes. for some notions, a lot of the notion is this sort of thing i think? eg maybe the door notion or the hammer notion or linearity of expectation?
* there are a bunch of problems that have some "generalized power/strength/oomph/money" to offer to solvers. that is, there are a bunch of problems of practical importance. most of the problems you'd think about are of this kind, even though probably from a value-neutral standpoint almost all possible problems have little significance (they are more like "obtain 1 milligram of mud") (however depending on how you set up the measure it could be that most solvable problems have interesting solutions, even though solving the problem doesn't have any direct significance)
	* at the current stage of societal development, solving a problem offers oomph by virtue of some greater system. for instance, someone might give you money in return for doing a thing, which lets you then get some other thing later. this wouldn't work without some conventions and systems keeping money valuable, and it would work less well with worse property rights. for another example, intellectual property rights and specifically the ability to patent things make it much more rewarded to come 
* there isn't really one generalized kind of oomph on offer, but many different oomphs that are not that convertible. you can have a local currency at a party for some game that wouldn't be recognized elsewhere; you have points in games; there are probably various rewards involved in human minds; you can have an RL reward signal in LLM training that gives more oomph to certain substructures in the AI.

# examples of purposive systems adrift
* word meanings changing over time
* phoneme realizations changing over time
* maybe fashion changing over time?
* the uses of things/technologies changing over time (e.g. a church building could now host a bookstore, GPUs started to be used for AI training, descartes started using algebraic equations to describe geometric objects)
* this happens: a thing X (or its purpose) changes, and it pushes a thing Y whose purpose is in part defined in terms of X to change as well, even though on the surface (as it would be expressed in language referencing X) the purpose of Y might not change. for example, with different cars on the market, it makes sense to make somewhat different roads; with different ways of reading papers online, it makes sense to host these papers on different pages 