
* when i'm playing chess on lichess on my phone or on lichess on my laptop or over the board, i associate certain motor movements with chess moves and this association is unconscious after a bit of practice — in each case, i just think of the abstract chess game. furthermore, i'm almost entirely using the same algorithm in each case. seeing chess as this abstract situation lets me do that!
* when i'm scrolling and zooming a page, i don't think about the motor movements, just about what i'd doing with the page, sorta like thinking of it as if it were some world with an abstract state and abstract input/output behavior
* when i'm typing, i don't think about how my fingers are supposed to move, just about what i'm writing. if i type up a thought as i'm thinking it, i'm not even sure if i think much about the words, just about the broader idea. it's like i'm playing a game in idea-space and the words are 'automated' 
* we see many things in terms of the natural number structure
* "when you are hammering the hammer does not exist: it only pops into existence when there is a breakdown and something doesn’t work, such as the head falling off. (Or for us computer people, the mouse doesn’t exist until it stops working.)" from https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/LbNx2ohBmBgFazbjq/the-top-30-books-to-expand-the-capabilities-of-ai-a-biased , from Understanding Computers and Cognition: A New Foundation for Design (1986) by Terry Winograd and Fernando Flores
* structure <> minsky's frame? https://pages.ucsd.edu/~scoulson/203/minsky.pdf
* or maybe structure <> "image schema" from The Body in the Mind: The Bodily Basis of Meaning, Imagination, and Reason (1987) by Mark Johnson
* we are able to use existing structures in somewhat novel circumstances
	* eg maybe first coming across forall-epsilon-exists-delta in math and viewing it as a game (see the discussion of this eg A.4–A.7 of Analysis I by Tao; I think I first saw the claim that maybe we can understand quantified statements is due to being able to understand games in a lecture by Joel David Hamkins in this series: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLg5tKDNI_a86OO6J9HuIngyROBsUqcf_z )
* we are able to combine multiple structures to handle a situation. 'compositionality'? maybe just anything involving multiple concepts hooking together is an example? like when i'm talking about the ising model, i need to operate an energy concept together with a probability concept. i'm worried i'm making a type error here. are concepts really the same as these abstract games? i guess the concepts in this case are associated with certain structures, but maybe aren't the same? i mean something is made a probability by being in a certain structure, right. idk confused!
	* again from https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/LbNx2ohBmBgFazbjq/the-top-30-books-to-expand-the-capabilities-of-ai-a-biased: 
		 * The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending And The Mind's Hidden Complexities (2003) by Gilles Fauconnier and Mark Turner
		 Fauconnier and Turner argue that 50,000 years ago humans gained the ability to think flexibly, enabling language and culture to evolve together, which ultimately led to our technological explosion. They argue that this flexible thinking originated from the ability to blend different cognitive frames together. To understand blending, consider the cartoon character Puss in Boots. The humor of the movies comes from the character blending the characteristics of both a human and a cat. Flexible thinking comes from compositionality, and blending is an important way to compose.
		 * Embodiment and the Inner Life: Cognition and Consciousness in the Space of Possible Minds (2010) by Murray Shanahan
		 Building on this idea of a breakdown leading to conscious thought, Murray Shanahan explains consciousness as a process that happens when the world breaks our expectations, similar to the discussion in Understanding Computers and Cognition. Lower animals are behavior based; they jump from one behavior to the next. Consciousness is the ability to take competing pieces of those behaviors and recombine them into something new. This recombining happens in a global workspace. Shanahan discusses how consciousness comes from a web in the brain and that parts fight for the right to control that web. It is a dynamical system. Processes jump into the system and try to create coalitions, with the parts being reminiscent of The Society of Mind. Those coalitions that win make it into consciousness.
* we are able to create new structures. we are able to learn the integers. maybe it'd be nice to think about how one gets the rational numbers from the naturals and some other structures having to do with parts or something