edit after writing: "see the literature on “expansion” and “contraction” consistency" (from https://joecarlsmith.com/2022/03/21/on-expected-utility-part-3-vnm-separability-and-more#ii-the-four-vnm-axioms ), seems plausible this would roughly be the same thing

also "What’s more, if your choices between _worlds_ start being sensitive to the option set, then I’m left with some sense that you’re caring about something _other_ than the world itself (thanks to Katja Grace for discussion). That is, somehow the value of the world ceases to be intrinsic to the world, and becomes dependent on other factors. Maybe some people don’t mind this, but to me, it looks unattractive."

Yea, okay, money pumps don't really matter. I don't really terminally care about not being money pumped, sure. They seem instrumental, not terminal — not the kind of thing that could justify a thing as fundamental as transitivity — it's not about some silly game. The instrumental arguments don't seem to give it the kind of force that I think transitivity can have. I think the following is a better argument for transitivity:

Suppose you are given a choice between options $A$, $B$, and $C$, presented to you all at once — that is, you can press a corresponding button and turn the universe into $A$, or into $B$, or into $C$ (and you have to press something — maybe because you're spawned at the center of a circular room and the button press is determined by which $120^\circ$-sector of the room a plurality of your atoms are in after a timer runs out). Now, there will be something that you don't mind picking, WLOG it's $A$. This determines your choice in all pairwise choices involving $A$, too — i.e., in favor of $A$ — because if you had, say, a preference for $C$ over $A$, then we could have created a room with two timers, where you have to first decide between $B$ vs \[$A$ and $C$\] by being on some side of the circle, and then again between $A$ and $C$, and now it'd seem like you could only either choose $B$ or $C$ (given you prefer $C$ over $A$), but it seems very weird to do so given that previously you chose $A$ when given a choice that appears identical in all relevant ways. So it must be the case that you prefer $A>C$ and $A>B$, which implies transitivity.

This way, it seems like much the same argument that you should have a preference at all, in that your choice between universes should intuitively be defined once you know everything about the universes, not depending on whether the choice was presented to you with one universe being called "chrismasmiracl" in one case and "eastereg" in another (unless, of course, you care about pushing buttons with certain strings on them, but we are assuming this is not the case here). It seems like a basic requirement of rationality that your decision be independent 

(it seems likely one can argue for independence like this too)

one could also argue for transitivity by saying you just have a rule like this I guess, inviting someone to just notice the rule. I think the above might sort of be like this but with symmetry instead of transitivity? also, you don't really care about symmetry either, but you do have this rule, i think. hmm, confusing 

some free association now
transitivity, independence, having preferences which don't change much — i don't do these because i have some brute preference (see also btw https://joecarlsmith.com/2023/02/16/why-should-ethical-anti-realists-do-ethics ) for these. i do these because these are implied by what it means (for me, anyway?) to really care about underlying things, i think. the decision room differences are silly, they don't matter, how could they matter. transitivity is just part of the only way to care about things — if you've really identified the full set of things you care about, you must be transitive w.r.t. them. it's not about caring that you care in a particular way, it's about really caring about the damn things

hmm sort of weird to have a distinction between things i care about and brute facts about me — after all, aren't the things i care about also just sort of brute facts about me? maybe different kinds of brute facts? maybe the same kind of brute fact? hmm maybe it's that transitivity is not a separate brute fact of this kind, it's more like a part of these other brute caring-facts

also like how is this different from being like "haha i'm just the kind of reasoning process that thinks goodness is virtue is purpose is \[however one would concretely define purpose\]"? it's just positing another equivalence? i guess the difference is that such people are in fact wrong about themselves. or like it seems abundantly obvious to me that adding 20 iq points would let them decouple, like there is some obvious heuristic here which causes these things to line up often and for agents with limited representational capacity to treat them as equivalent, hrrmgmgh. maybe adding 20 iq to me would let me decouple the decisions in the decision room setups too??