
# notes

This repository hosts some of [my](https://kaarelh.github.io/) personal notes from 2022 onward, mostly on topics with some relevance to reducing catastrophic risk from AI.
* Most of the notes are written for myself (to help me think some question through locally, to give me the option to reload a picture of some question later, and for other reasons). A significant fraction is written with potentially publishing partly in mind.
* I think there are hundreds of somewhat-written posts here, and maybe ideas for a thousand posts. If you want to write something into a post, feel free to do that.^[You should probably add me as a coauthor or mention me in the acknowledgments though (with which is appropriate depending on specifics of the case).]
* Even though I'm posting these notes, I do not think of myself as publicly asserting the things I'm saying in them in anything like the way that I would be if I e.g. published a paper or a comment on a forum.^[Like, compared to what I'm doing when I make-public the claims in these notes, when I assert something in a canonically public-facing thing, I'm staking my reputation on the truth of the claim much more,I've thought about the claim much more carefully, I've put much more effort into phrasing it so that it is more robustly true (like, under different humans in an intellectual community trying to interpret it, not just in my own system or in some even more local context that might not have been presented in the note), and I'm proposing much more strongly that you involve the claim in your thinking.]
* As of posting these in March 2026, I think various claims I make in these notes are wrong, and I know of various ways various propounded conceptions are confused and can be improved.^[Ultimately, probably almost all the conceptions are confused or at least extremely impoverished. :)]
* Still, the notes are obviously evidence of what I think. If you see from a note that I'm wrong about something and write to me and help me see that I was wrong about it, I'll be grateful. Ditto for offering me better methods/conceptions/models/ideas/concepts/words/designs.
* Acknowledgments. Most importantly, I've benefited from discussions with Sam Eisenstat, Jake Mendel, Simon Skade, and Kirke Joamets, and from [essays by Tsvi Benson-Tilsen](https://www.alignmentforum.org/users/tsvibt). See [here](https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/nkeYxjdrWBJvwbnTr/an-advent-of-thought#:~:text=Acknowledgments.%20I%20have,forgetting.%5B9%5D) for a longer list of good people.