
a few notes on using fiction in reasoning and also coining and using proverbs in reasoning. used to be really against it. see eg fictional evidence eliezer thing, just provides no evidence, shit argument that x leads to y in a single book, whatever. still really against most uses of it, but these people will maybe just say other equally stupid stuff anyway i guess, or maybe be even more stupid, if they don't have this, but idk here. anyway, some good things about this:
	* of course stating the proverb is not an explicit argument. but maybe you can use proverbs to create classifiers in your head. you could create a classifier for 'x is bad because he says low-quality stuff' and 'x is good because he is confident', in fact imagine these properties even being exactly the same thing, but now your classifier for the overall concept to apply can still be trained once you think in terms of this. your trained classifier can still provide signal even if your explicit reasoning is complete bs, at least supposing the properties mean the exact same thing in some sense. though i guess there's a version where they can't because they have different relations — namely they relate to badness differently. idk maybe we should think of this as you having different classifiers for confidence and saying a bunch of low-quality stuff, so we should really think of these already as being different concepts. but i guess then the point is that it can be helpful to create these valenced concepts? fiction, proverbs maybe provide material to use in creating these concepts? some central things to tie the concept to? and then it's helpful for you to have a classifier of this-proverb-applies-situations, or this-fiction-analogy-situations, even though it's not explicitly any evidence or is very little or very shit evidence. one way to view it is that the proverb triggering can be a lot of evidence for you