* It should be the case that after removing a parenthetical from a sentence, we get a grammatical sentence. However, since there is a space before and after a parenthetical (like this one) sometimes, there are cases where the remaining sentence would be ungrammatical because of having two spaces in a row.
* The appearance of morphosyntactic merges in speech and writing should respect the order of semantic merges. For instance, as a nuclear scientist is not nuclear, we should perhaps instead write "\[nuclear scient]-ist" (the reason I'm using square brackets here is that they seem to be the canonical choice for showing phrasal structure, and morphology is just subword-level syntax, I think). For another example, instead of "von Neumann-Morgenstern utility theorem", we should write "\[von Neumann]-Morgenstern utility theorem".
* "Deoxyribonucleic acid (abbreviated DNA) is the molecule that carries genetic information for the development and functioning of an organism." is wrong because you are not really abbreviating the concept of course, you are abbreviating the word for the concept. also e.g. "The four parathyroid glands sit on top of the thyroid and make a hormone called parathyroid hormone, commonly _abbreviated_ as PTH and unrelated to thyroid hormone." omg this is just almost always used incorrectly???
* in general, there ought to be an org that fights for the use-mention distinction (the point above is just one instance of the issue)
* multiple commas needed i guess when there are multiple clauses ending at once. noticed this in "though if one were to do best GPT-5 size model research for 5 years, 1 jan 2024 – 1 jan 2029, (with only testing access to GPT-4) then what one does for the last..." where it sort of feels like there should be a comma after the parenthetical but outside the parenthetical, because there is a clause of the main sentence that only ends after the parenthetical. obviously what happens in usual practice is that multiple commas get collapsed; with the parenthetical removal grammaticality rule, this comma should be inside the parenthetical. but this seems wrong, because it's part of the structure of the outside sentence there, it's not like that comma belongs inside that parenthetical — perhaps it contradicts the parenthetical being a clause. ahh nice! have a contradiction between parenthetical being a clause of the syntax tree and the removal or placement of the parenthetical both giving grammatical sentences. so need multiple commas in a row in a sentence with multiple clauses ending at once to fix this problem. so the sentence without the parenthetical needs to be "though if one were to do best GPT-5 size model research for 5 years, 1 jan 2024 – 1 jan 2029,, then what one does for the last..." 
* more generally, once one starts to carefully think about what it takes for grammar to track the operations it sort of tracks, I think a lot of extravagance is required to correctly express the order of operations. For example, consider "\[There is a tight frame $W=(W_1,\ldots,W_m)\in \left(\mathbb{R}^n\right)^m$ with $||W_i||^2=a_i$\] $\iff$ \[for all $i\in [m]$, we have $a_i\leq \frac{1}{n}\sum_{j=1}^m a_j$\]." The capitalization here sort of ought to come outside the first phrase, but the word "there" ought to be inside. I guess the more common version of this issue is that a phrase beginning marker should not be attached to a word to begin with — the word with that phrase beginning marker is far from forming a linguistic unit.
