
1) Analyzing/interpreting activations is likely to be easier than analyzing/interpreting weights. It is much easier to understand what's in a person's head in a particular situation (especially if one is content with only understanding some high-level properties) than how their head works in general. Analyzing weights is equivalent to understanding how a mind works in all situations; it seems much easier to merely understand particular activation vectors on particular inputs, and to e.g. find high-level features (like truth) encoded inside.
 2) To understand a high-level property from weights, it seems plausible that we'd need to really understand the whole circuit that the model has for a certain kind of computation. But for activations, there are hopefully ways to get data about useful high-level things without detecting any circuits.
3) What's more, it's probably easier to edit computations on particular inputs than to edit an entire mind into a different mind?
Of course, we should work on both in parallel, and use each to learn more about the other This is just a list of considerations for interpreting activations being easier 


from https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/mkbGjzxD8d8XqKHzA/the-singular-value-decompositions-of-transformer-weight#Manual_Labelling_of_GPT2_medium_Win :
An important distinction to keep in mind is between the directions of representations in the _activities_ of a network for a given input, which is the usual approach taken (i.e. in the logit lens), vs the representations of the directions of the _weights_. Investigating the weights has an interesting set of advantages and disadvantages compared to the activations.

A central difference which impacts the difficulty of the analysis is that the weights are static and known ahead of time while the activations can change and are technically unbounded, as an infinite number of inputs can be fed to the network resulting in different activations. Analyses of weights of a given network therefore is a promising type of  _static analysis_ for neural networks equivalent to static analysis of source code which can just be run quickly on any given network before actually having to run it on live inputs. This could potentially be used for alignment as a first line of defense against any kind of harmful behaviour _without having to run the network at all_. Techniques that analyze the weights are also typically cheaper computationally, since they do not involve running large numbers of forward passes through the network and/or storing large amounts of activations or dealing with large datasets.

Conversely, the downsides of weight analysis is that it cannot tell us about specific model behaviours on specific tokens. The weights instead can be thought of as encoding the space of potential transformations that can be applied to a specific input datapoint but not any specific transformation. They probably can also be used to derive information about average behaviour of the network but not necessarily extreme behaviour which might be most useful for alignment. A further line of necessary and important work will be correlating the insights we can obtain from analyzing both the weights and the activations -- for instance for a given set of activations, can we trace through the primary weight directions _on those activations_ and hence begin to get a much better sense of the true _program trace_ of the network rather than just its static source code, which the weights provide.

Finally, while our findings of semantically interpretable SVD directions in the weights is highly robust, we believe that our applications of directly editing model weights and automated methods for finding relevant weight directions for a given query can be much improved in future work, and developing automated methods to do this will be highly important for any large scale interpretability approach. We also will try finding dataset examples that maximize the similarity with the singular vectors in the latent space, as these may give even more signal than the direct token projections.