
to add to the list of things we could write about:  
* something about properties of optimally punishing acts vs omissions  
* concretely imagining a world with no (or a reduced) act/omission distinction in law  
* the 'ethics-epistemics bridge': the philosophical move of reducing analyzing cases where we naively appear to have trouble assigning probabilities (sleeping beauty, cases involving quantum suicide, hare's problem involving an infinite number of paired people) — epistemically tricky cases — to purely ethical questions. maybe also going through some canonical arguments grounding probabilities and pointing out the implicit/explicit assumptions which fail in these cases  
* taking a careful look at whether one really ought to self-modify into an updateless agent. there's the obvious counterargument that any kind of self-modification seems scary — what if you self-modify into something quite stupid! — and i think maybe this could be made precise interestingly  
* a specification of the acceptable ways of changing oneself/others — clarifying manipulation
* specifying a translation between functional decision theory and kantianism  
* when is it right to be content with an anthropic explanation of a fact; when/why should we look for further explanations?
* making precise the following analogy: [an individual : ethical reflection] :: [humanity : politics] (i guess this is sort of in the water supply, but i think there's probably lots to see more clearly here. the point would be to specify which parts of ethical reflection map to which parts of politics, to specify the disanalogies, to see if some parts of our understanding of one can be leveraged to better understand the other. the vibe of a summary of the finished product here would be similar to e.g. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curry%E2%80%93Howard_correspondence#General_formulation )  
* why are we fine with extending mathematics whatever way is convenient 

  
there's also a bunch of stuff that has to do with the philosophy of language/thought/reasoning that i'm interested in; i expect you'll be less interested in that, but i'll mention some stuff anyway:  
* why do we talk to ourselves and to each other in the ~same language at all?  
* why is there often something to vague nonsense? like, we have some concept, we come to view it as suspect, to realize that it doesn't make any sense, but there's often some adjacent thing that makes sense, or maybe multiple distinct adjacent things, or something. i feel like a naive picture of language doesn't imply this property, so it seems surprising. does it have to do with some properties of optimal concept-systems, or does it have to do with us being bounded thinkers that'd struggle to change well all at once?  
* suppose you have a language constructed as solving some reasonable optimization problem (we will obv need to be more specific here; eg some concrete version of bengio's thing). under which conditions would it have a 'token for 'good'' (i.e. in the sense of the good that humans talk about)? is getting a 'token for 'good'' the same kind of thing as getting a 'token for 'tree''?
* just writing some set of notes where we make a pretty naive attempt to construct a sensible philosophy of language from scratch (i have a number of concrete ideas here. we could think of this as a course project. i think we would learn a lot and quite plausibly push the boundary of human understanding also lol — i feel like humanity really understands quite little here still)
* just coming up with any concrete version of quine's holism that isn't catastrophically bad. it would be nice for language to latch on to the world not just along the boundary, to be changeable in small chunks, and for us to be able to reflect on possible changes in language — maybe in the same language. (well, really any concrete model of how language works at all would be nice, but i'm sympathetic to sth like quine's view, so that seems like a reasonable restriction.)
* making the case that (scientific, interesting) thought is really reflective — that reflection is not some weird thing
* better understanding obstacles to a full formalization of scientific or ethical reasoning (the way we've basically formalized mathematics; in particular, perhaps this needn't include a specification of the reasoning process, just a specification of the structure in which this reasoning occurs, much like we have little understanding at present of how good mathematical reasoning proceeds, but we can state a precise structure for it to occur in)
* (why) must AGI appear roughly when math-AGI appears?
* can we better understand the role of goals/wanting in a system of reasoning? what would it take to make a 'goal-less scientific reasoner'; is such a thing possible?
