
It is true for both Shannon entropies and Kolmogorov complexities that corresponding mutual informations are symmetric — that is, that $X$ knows about $Y$ just as much as $Y$ knows about $X$.^[In the Kolmogorov case, this is true up to a small additive error term.] This note gives a proof that works for either (note for self: i don't have a unified proof yet actually lol).^[I'd be surprised if the proof were novel, but I didn't get it from anywhere.]

# notation

Letting $X$ be either a random variable or a bitstring, we will let $C(X)$ denote the "complexity" of $X$, which could respectively either be the Shannon entropy of the random variable $X$^[that is, $\sum_{x\text{ in the range of }X}p(x) \log(p(x))$] or the Kolmogorov complexity of the bitstring $X$^[that is, the length of the smallest bitstring/program which outputs the bitstring $X$ (taking some programming language which lets one understand bitstrings as programs)]. We let $C(X|Y)$ denote the complexity of $X$ given $Y$, which could respectively either be the conditional entropy of $X$ given $Y$^[that is, the expectation over values $y$ in the range of $Y$ of the entropy of the random variable $X|(Y=y)$] or the conditional Kolmogorov complexity of $X$ given $Y$^[that is, the length of the shortest program which, given $Y$ as its input, outputs $X$]. Let us define the mutual information as $I(X;Y)=C(X)-C(X|Y)$ — the difference between the complexity of $X$ and the complexity of $X$ if $Y$ is given. You can think of $I(X;Y)$ as the number of bits that $Y$ "knows about $X$". The point of this note is to give a proof that $I(X;Y)=I(Y;X)$^[exactly in the Shannon case, and up to an additive error of $O(\log C(X)+\log C(Y))$ in the Kolmogorov case ] — that is, that $Y$ knows as much about $X$ as $X$ knows about $Y$.

why is mutual information symmetric? wts H(X,Y)=H(X)+H(Y|X) (since doing this for $Y$ as well and rearranging this gives the desired thing). we can show this via two inequalities. 

oh hmm i guess the kolmogorov one implies the shannon one, by sampling? like you create the strings by sampling and then use the kolmo one, and that implies the shannon one?

anyway, can also try to connect differently. we can prove the kolmogorov one with two inequalities.

$C(X,Y)\leq C(X)+C(Y|X)$ is easy, because you can specify X,Y by giving X and then Y given X

the other direction is more interesting. so here we want to show that $C(X,Y)\geq C(X)+C(Y|X)$, or equivalently that you can tell me $Y$ if given $X$ with at most $C(X,Y)-C(X)$ bits. one can do this by just running all programs of complexity at most $C(X,Y)$ in parallel, and looking at ones which output $X$ and then some stuff. now there are two cases. the first key idea is that there cannot be more than $2^{-C(X)}$ probability mass on outputting $X$ here, because otherwise you could specify $X$ by saying which of the at most $2^{C(X)}$ strings with probability at least  $2^{-C(X)}$ it is (more precisely, you have this thing running all programs in parallel, you keep track of how much probability each first string has already, and then $X$ emerges as like the $k$th thing which gets at least $2^{-C(X)}$ probability at some point, and so you can just tell me what $k$ is to tell me what $X$ is, which takes at most $C(X)$ bits). so we know that $X$ gets at most $2^{-C(X)}$ probability here, but this means that there are at most $2^{C(X,Y)-C(X)}$ programs which output $X$ and something else, and one of those outputs $X$ and $Y$, so you can just tell me which one with $C(X,Y)-C(X)$ bits (more precisely, if it is the $k$th one to halt with $X$ and something else as its output, you just tell me $k$). so you can tell me $Y$ given $X$ with at most $C(X,Y)-C(X)$ bits, which is what we wanted to show!