
the point of this note is to see what goes wrong when trying to make https://arxiv.org/pdf/2205.11461 work in the approximate setting, mostly with an eye toward getting a better incompleteness result for network coding

we'd now try to show that the following is undecidable: 'given a list of approximate conditional independence assumptions, does this other approximate conditional independence hold?'.

what do we mean by 'approximate conditional independence'? instead of saying I(X;Y|Z)=0, let's say that $H(X|Z)+H(Y|Z)\approx H(X,Y|Z)$, where in the assumption $\approx$ means up to $\delta (\sum_X H(X))$, where the sum is over all random variables under consideration, and in the conclusion it's the same but up to $\varepsilon$, and then the real question is if for every $\varepsilon>0$ there is a $\delta>0$ such that this implication holds.

(if this is uncomputable, then also it's uncomputable to check if some approximate entropy inequalities imply another approximate entropy inequality — indeed, in our approximate version, the question is already explicitly of this form!)

hmm is that what we really want?
## what statement do we really want?

on the entropy polytope side, we'd like to have points that are either securely in the interior or securely in the exterior — that is, points with some eps-ball around which is either entirely outside of the rate region or entirely inside — but where there's no algorithm which outputs which is the case (for all of our points). this would show that there is no algorithm for telling if you are in the polytope or not which halts with the correct answer whenever you are in the interior or the interior of the complement (but is allowed to do whatever when the point is on the boundary), because such an algorithm could be used to solve our constructed problem.

i guess we could hope to make such a problem by just having these disjoint conditional independence statements with some particular eps, say 1/1000 for now (though this might really end up depending on the number of variables), like with precise equalities like $H(X|Z)+H(Y|Z)= H(X,Y|Z) + \varepsilon$ (where we've normalized the sum of all entropies to $1$, let's say). maybe requesting this for a particular eps isn't feasible though? do we care? hmm. like we will end up having some monoid word problem that we want to translate into this kind of problem, where the key things will be:
* if there is an implication in the monoid world, ie if the given two words are in fact forced to be equal in all finite monoids given the assumptions, then there should not be a construction where we have our approximate conditional independence statements together with some kind of conditional non-independence of the conclusion variables (and in fact there should be a ball around where there's not a construction)
* if there is no implication in the monoid world, ie there is a monoid and map into it satisfying the given relations but without having the conclusion relation satisfied, then there should be random variables with those approximate conditional independences and conditional non-independence of the conclusion variables (and in fact there should be a ball around where there is a construction)

which numbers to ask for though? we could get numbers by perturbing a construction, but how would we get numbers without having a construction? like the non-existence might work out even if we're careless about choosing the perturbation (though this might require a bunch of work, still — we need to try to push some epsilons through the argument or something, to say that if you could get near-independence in the assumptions but strong non-independence in the conclusion here, then there must be an underlying precise monoid thing (which needs to be constructed) where there isn't an equality either, which would be a contradiction), but how would the existence work out? hmm... is there some universal way to perturb from an actually conditionally independent point, if it exists, to a point where a ball could indeed be found, ie without knowing the former point? so the polytope does have some known points, right: just 1 at one entropy, 0 everywhere else. this isn't enough though — we want more known points which together span to pull off this transformation. this seems plausibly fine though — let's say we have some canonical direction toward which we can always pull, creating a point with a ball around it. but i think there's another issue here: we don't know all the joint entropies, right, only some relations between them? so really we don't seem to be asking about whether a particular point is in the convex body or not, but instead about whether there is a point in the body satisfying certain equalities. this seems really related though! like if there were a decision algorithm for the body, surely there'd be a decision algorithm for this question about a slice through the body? 

hmm. maybe whatever? like okay, assuming this canonical shift business works out, we look at the projection of the polytope to just some coordinates (ie getting tuples of some linear combos of coordinates seen in the body), and ask if a point here is feasible or not, with a guarantee that it is either way inside or way outside. hmm wait. i think that there is still a big issue: even if something with conditional non-independence is possible, we don't know the degree to which it is non-independent, and i guess they could only be a little non-independent? anyway, we don't know which point to ask for that should be possible here! or maybe we could know that? like could we have a setup where if non-independence happens, then it happens completely, like two things are just conditionally functions of each other? 

yea that seems desirable. can we have a setup where in the non-approximate case, we know that if the monoid thing holds, then we get forced conditional independence, and if the monoid implication fails, then we get an example with conditional determining (or maybe the other way around)? so then we could ask for a point which is a small shift (toward canonical points) from the thing with conditional determining. if the conditionally determined thing exists, then this would be an interior point; if it fails, then conditional independence would be forced in the exact case, so inshallah there couldn't be a point with this much determinacy (because one could still cook up a close enough monoid thing from it and that monoid thing would then need to have the equality fulfilled, but that would hopefully contradict with the random variables in fact being far from conditionally independent)

# surely we can check if a point is inside or outside by reducing to a smaller domain, actually?

if we only care up to eps, can't we only limit a search to domains of size at most N(eps) total, for some computable N(eps)? if we could, then we'd be done, because we just check for smaller and smaller eps until getting to the eps such that there is in fact a ball around the given point of that radius, at which point we find out if it's inside or outside. so for the natural convex body problem to be undecidable, there'd need to not be any such computable bound N(eps)

but surely we can just start from a construction and reduce the size of the domain?? maybe start by just doing the 2-variable case here? 

so have some joint on $\mathcal{X}\times\mathcal{Y}$. want to reduce the domain size $|\mathcal{X}||\mathcal{Y}|$ to some const $N(\varepsilon)$ while preserving the three quantities $\frac{H(X)}{H(X)+H(Y)}, \frac{H(Y)}{H(X)+H(Y)}, \frac{H(X,Y)}{H(X)+H(Y)}$ up to $\varepsilon$. 

## this feels related to some hypergraph degree sequence problem?
like after taking many copies, maybe it's fine to just think of the remaining distribution as uniform on some subset of sequence-tuples (it's really only uniform up to some small correction, and idk if that correction is really small enough for us, but let's ignore that for now)? 

it's also sorta like some weird k-partite k-uniform hypergraph which is sorta regular even? and then it's just a question about feasible degree sequences for these things? here we have some funny notion of degree, where we eg look at how many edges a pair shows up in together (that's like H(Z|X,Y))

undecidability of linear inequalities between homomorphism densities seems sorta related here: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1005.2382

an information-theoretic version of szemeredi's regularity lemma: https://arxiv.org/pdf/math/0504472