
* The change is $U\mapsto U+P_{U^\perp}\Sigma U$.
* The distance moved is $\lVert P_{U^\perp}\Sigma U\rVert=\sqrt{\mathrm{Tr}\left(\Sigma P_U \Sigma P_{U^\perp}\right)}=\sqrt{\sum_i s_i\sum_{j}(s_i-s_j)(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2}$. (Note, looking below, that this is the sqrt of a linear combo of mass changes in coordinates.)
* The mass change in coordinate $i$ is $(2P_U\Sigma P_{U^\perp})_{ii}=2\sum_{j}(s_i-s_j)(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2 = 2s_i\sum_{j \text{ with }s_j\neq s_i} \left((u_i'\cdot u_j')^2+(u_i''\cdot u_j'')^2\right)=4s_i\sum_{j \text{ with }s_j\neq s_i}(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2$, where $u_i'$ denotes row $i$ of $U$ and $u_i''$ denotes row $i$ of $U^\perp$.
* The sum of progresses in all coordinates is $\sum_i s_i(2P_U\Sigma P_{U^\perp})_{ii}=2\mathrm{Tr}\left(\Sigma P_U \Sigma P_{U^\perp}\right)$.
* We need to make $\varepsilon d$ progress in total, and we want to only move by $O(\sqrt{\varepsilon d})$.
* We're happy if we can make progress at a rate of $\Omega\left(\frac{\varepsilon d}{\sqrt{\varepsilon d}}\right)=\Omega\left(\sqrt{\varepsilon d}\right)$. (This is actually not sufficient, because maybe we already fixed the squared masses for some coordinates and came up with some fake signs for those $i$, but let's ignore this issue on a first pass.)
* So we're happy if $\frac{2\mathrm{Tr}\left(\Sigma P_U \Sigma P_{U^\perp}\right)}{\sqrt{\mathrm{Tr}\left(\Sigma P_U \Sigma P_{U^\perp}\right)}}=2\sqrt{\mathrm{Tr}\left(\Sigma P_U \Sigma P_{U^\perp}\right)}=\Omega\left(\sqrt{\varepsilon d}\right)$.
* So we're happy if $\mathrm{Tr}\left(\Sigma P_U \Sigma P_{U^\perp}\right)=\Omega\left(\varepsilon d\right)$.
	* Can we show that if $\mathrm{Tr}\left(\Sigma P_U \Sigma P_{U^\perp}\right)=O\left(\varepsilon d\right)$, then we're closer than $\varepsilon d$ squared distance to a direct sum? (ans: yes, i think i have a proof)


(we really need some more precise argument/calculation, probably thinking about progress in individual coordinates, because of the thing where some coordinate masses might become fixed before others and then we're no longer really making progress in these some of the time)
* If for every $i$, $\frac{4\sum_{j \text{ with }s_j\neq s_i}(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2}{\lVert P_{U^\perp}\Sigma U\rVert}= \Omega\left(\sqrt{\varepsilon}\frac{\sqrt{d}}{m}\right)$, then we will be done in $O(\varepsilon d)$ squared distance.
* This is $\frac{2\left(\Sigma P_U \Sigma P_{U^\perp}\right)_{ii}}{\sqrt{\mathrm{Tr}\left(\Sigma P_U \Sigma P_{U^\perp}\right)}}$ 

Let's now consider the strategy that sets $\Sigma_{ii}'=0$ whenever coordinate $i$ gets the desired sqmass, and then sets $\Sigma_{ii}'$ to the fixing-directed sign again if coordinate $i$ climbs back to $\pm \delta$ sqmass, for some very small $\delta$. Here, we're calling $\Sigma'$ the actual matrix defining the change, i.e. $U\mapsto U+P_{U^\perp}\Sigma' U$, and we're letting $\Sigma$ still denote the matrix with the desired sign changes. This guarantees that all coords are either making $\geq 0$ progress toward the desired sqmass or inside $[-\delta,\delta]$. The rate of progress is now $\frac{2\mathrm{Tr}\left(\Sigma P_U \Sigma' P_{U^\perp}\right)}{\sqrt{\mathrm{Tr}\left(\Sigma' P_U \Sigma' P_{U^\perp}\right)}}$, and we are still happy as long as this is $\Omega\left(\sqrt{\varepsilon d}\right)$. Expanding this out as sums, we get $$\frac{2\sum_i s_i \sum_j (s_i'-s_j')(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2}{\sqrt{\sum_i s_i' \sum_j (s_i'-s_j')(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2}}=\frac{2\sum_i s_i' \sum_j (s_i'-s_j')(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2+2\sum_i (s_i-s_i') \sum_j (s_i'-s_j')(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2}{\sqrt{\sum_i s_i' \sum_j (s_i'-s_j')(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2}}=\frac{2\sum_{i \text{ not fixed}} s_i \sum_j (s_i-s_j')(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2-2\sum_{i \text{ fixed}} s_i \sum_{j \text{ not fixed}} s_j(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2}{\sqrt{\sum_{i \text{ not fixed}} s_i \sum_{j}(s_i-s_j')(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2}}$$ $$=\frac{2\sum_{i\text{ not fixed},j\text{ not fixed}}(1-s_i s_j)(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2+2\sum_{i\text{ not fixed},j\text{ fixed}}(1-s_is_j)(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2}{\sqrt{\sum_{i\text{ not fixed},j\text{ not fixed}}(1-s_i s_j)(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2+\sum_{i\text{ not fixed}, j\text{ fixed}}(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2}}.$$ The bad case has all $s_i=s_j$ in the second term in the numerator, but most of the denominator being contributed by $\sum_{i\text{ not fixed}, j\text{ fixed}}(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2$. So the fixed and the non-fixed need to have a big interaction. Hmm, actually, what if we just care twice as much about progress on things not yet inside $[-\delta,+\delta]$? Then I think we're fine?

With this correction, I think we'll get $\sum_{i\text{ not fixed},j\text{ not fixed}, s_i\neq s_j}(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2+\sum_{i\text{ not fixed}, j\text{ fixed}}(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2=O(\varepsilon d)$, so we should get a tegum of a fixed thing, a small thing, and a big thing. Pf: first take SVD of fixed, zero out others. then repeat in orth compl for other two. wait, but how could we always get here or stuck? isn't it possible that fixed has big dot prods with big, say, but we can't make progress? hmm. how do we really get stuck here? i guess we might get stuck when we need to move all the fixed stuff back toward the center? 

no i think this doesn't work. the issue has to do with fixed coords becoming unfixed again, i think. we could make the coeff go up again, but then maybe we're not really making progress at all? like, we could just be pumping mass into fixed coordinates, then getting them unfixed again because of other fixed coordinates, then fixing these, in some bad cycle. 

what's the basic moral reason for optimism though? well, in the formula for squared distance 

maybe we can decrease the max and argue about that instead? like, suppose we just include $\pm 1$ in $\Sigma$ for those coords which are currently maximally off. for other stuff, move in arb dirs. what does it mean to make progress too slowly here? 


* The change is $U\mapsto U+P_{U^\perp}\Sigma U$.
* The distance moved is $\lVert P_{U^\perp}\Sigma U\rVert=\sqrt{\mathrm{Tr}\left(\Sigma P_U \Sigma P_{U^\perp}\right)}=\sqrt{\sum_i s_i\sum_{j}(s_i-s_j)(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2}$. (Note, looking below, that this is the sqrt of a linear combo of mass changes in coordinates.)
* The mass change in coordinate $i$ is $(2P_U\Sigma P_{U^\perp})_{ii}=2\sum_{j}(s_i-s_j)(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2 = 2s_i\sum_{j \text{ with }s_j\neq s_i} \left((u_i'\cdot u_j')^2+(u_i''\cdot u_j'')^2\right)=4s_i\sum_{j \text{ with }s_j\neq s_i}(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2$, where $u_i'$ denotes row $i$ of $U$ and $u_i''$ denotes row $i$ of $U^\perp$.

Consider a choice where some $s_i=\pm 1$ and some $s_i=0$, namely the extremal vs non-extremal ones.
* then the distance is sqrt of sum over i extremal j non-extremal of twice that dot prod squared plus sum over i extremal j other side extremal 4 times dot prod squared. 
* the progress made on extremal ones is that same sum? so we're happy?
* i guess almost all of the time, there should just be one extremal thing. but then maybe we need to be careful about fucking up other stuff too much or something?
* or maybe we should have thin strips of extremal things, like really it's some small delta from extremal? 
* what about total progress in this case? looking at just extremal seems a bit weird? or maybe it's fine?
* i guess the issue is that the change of sqmass on a non-extremal coord j is the sum over i extremal of $-2s_i$ times i dot j squared, which cancels the extremal x non-extremal progress term?



## attempt with $s_i$ proportional to deviation from desired sqmass
one issue with the choice $s_i=\epsilon_i$ was that the rate of a certain kind of progress eventually always becomes too slow. but maybe we can say that things are fine even though the rate of progress is slow, because the remaining gap might be small? recall that the metric is $\sum \epsilon_i^2$, and the rate of progress on it is $\sum_{i,j}(\epsilon_i-\epsilon_j)^2 (u_i'\cdot u_j')^2$, and progress becomes unsustainably slow (at least naively) when this is $o(\epsilon^3 m)$. In terms of $\varepsilon$'s, this is $\sum_{i,j}\left(\frac{\varepsilon_i-\varepsilon_j}{\varepsilon}\right)^2(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2=o(\varepsilon d)$. I guess this is saying that each pair of rows is either really close in masses or really quite orthogonal, or ykno that that's mostly the case. I guess we can just conclude that everything which is above $\varepsilon/100$ needs to be orthogonal to everything below $-\varepsilon/100$, modulo assuming there is a bunch of such mass. and then maybe we've made enough progress on the rest to be happy? It feels a little like this screams out for a better progress measure though, because it also gets stuck when we aren't really doing that badly — when we're just getting really close. what would an alternative progress measure look like? the real condition is that the remaining integral should be bad. i guess if we have a strategy guaranteeing that the progress measure is decreasing, it's fine to look at how long it would take to get to having the progress measure decreased to 0 at the current rate. so maybe we ought to look at the current value of the progress measure divided by the current rate of progress, and ask always that this is $O(\sqrt{\varepsilon d})$, instead of asking that the rate of progress itself is naively good enough to do the entire path with that rate? In our case, the rate of progress is $\sqrt{\sum_{i,j}\epsilon_i(\epsilon_i-\epsilon_j)(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2}$, and the value of the metric is $\sum_i \epsilon_i^2$. It is roughly necessary and almost sufficient (i think we lose some log factor here) to be making good progress that the remaining metric over the rate of progress be at most the max allowed dist, which is $$\frac{\sum_i \epsilon_i^2}{\sqrt{\sum_{i,j} \epsilon_i(\epsilon_i-\epsilon_j)(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2}}=O\left(\sqrt{\varepsilon d}\right).$$
This is the same as $\left(\sum_i \epsilon_i^2\right)^2<<\varepsilon d \sum_{i,j}(\epsilon_i-\epsilon_j)^2 (u_i'\cdot u_j')^2$. Translating to $\varepsilon$'s, we get that things are fine as long as $$\frac{\varepsilon d}{m^2}\left(\sum_i \left(\frac{\varepsilon_i}{\varepsilon}\right)^2\right)^2<<\sum_{i,j}\left(\frac{\varepsilon_i-\varepsilon_j}{\varepsilon}\right)^2(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2.$$
Translating to expected values, this becomes $$\frac{\varepsilon d}{m^2} \mathbb{E}_i\left[\left(\frac{\varepsilon_i}{\varepsilon}\right)^2\right]^2<<\mathbb{E}_{i,j}\left[\left(\frac{\varepsilon_i-\varepsilon_j}{\varepsilon}\right)^2(u_i'\cdot u_j')^2\right]$$
with $\delta_i:=\frac{\varepsilon_i}{\varepsilon}$ 

I guess the issue is that the LHS still becomes smaller than the RHS eventually here, because it has fourth powers of $\varepsilon_i$? this seems weird. surely this strategy is fine at least some of the time?



As long as the LHS expectation is close to $1$, I guess this should probably recover the previous condition? Anyway, let's think about what it looks like for the RHS to become smaller than $\varepsilon d / m^2$. I guess we will need to work with this thing where everything outside of -eps/100 to eps/100 is orth to everything on the other side? have we made progress then? or maybe we can take a random move to get quite far from anything like this? 

the random move. what kind of move can we even make here. we can use $999999 \varepsilon d$ squared mass on this move, as long as we don't fuck up the row sums (or the column sums) and get to a large value of this critical quantity. i guess it's plausible that if we get a large value at all, we can't fuck it up too much except when we've made solid progress? so how would we construct a nudge that moves stuff into a well-mixed state while keeping row norms under control? i guess intuitively we can afford to add a random vector of size $9999\sqrt{\varepsilon}$ to every column while staying in the motion constraint. So the squared size of the motion in each coord should be $9999\varepsilon/m$, so the size of the thing added to each entry of the matrix is typically like $9999 \sqrt{\varepsilon/m}$. so each vec gets added a vec of typical size $9999 \sqrt{\varepsilon d/m}$. what does this typically do to the squared mass? i guess there is a linear and a quadratic term; the quadratic term is to fuck it up by $9999\varepsilon d/m$, and that's probably right. this could become problematic unless we're careful. we might want to find a matrix orthogonal in two different ways to the given matrix and still say it moves stuff by a lot to make this thing work. anyway, if you now look at any two big index sets, what can we say about the dot products between them that get created? i think we can say that at least the added vectors are random wrt the other side, so if you have a vec of norm $\sqrt{d/m}$ and a random vec of size $\sqrt{\varepsilon d/m}$, then their dot prod is the prod of norms times the dot prod of two random unit vecs which is $1/\sqrt{d}$, so should get $\sqrt{\varepsilon d}/m$. squared, this is $\varepsilon d/m^2$. summed over $m^2$ pairs, we get $\varepsilon d$. so it looks like maybe after this nudge we won't get stuck. but we might really need to be very careful about the part where we take a big step without fucking the column orthogonalities and row norms. can we just find a matrix with orthogonal columns and also row continuations orth to prev rows maybe, and add that? when we are at d=m/2, the complement is unique, and it generally won't have this orthogonality property, i think? like why would the unique completion have the other half of each row be orthogonal to the first? actually i guess it's not unique in that sense lol, we have freedom here, we can pick whatever basis we like for the orth compl. maybe we should think instead about rotating the vecs in the original thing though. each row should be rotated (maybe by a diff rotation), and cols should be rotated by the same rotation. we can just think about which vecs in u perp to slide everything toward i guess. we don't even need to slide stuff toward different orth vecs! it's just about finding some orth vecs in U^perp whose coord rows are orth to the rows of the mat. intuitively this is really few constraints, so we should have a lot of freedom here! like, we have the freedom to pick whatever in U^perp we like for each column's change direction, and we just get a single constraint from each row. can we think about this geometrically? i guess if we think about the matrix, then we're seeking a point in the intersection of some subspace and a bunch of cylinders. there's plenty of points in the subspace. maybe one strategy here is to simply pick random vecs for the rows, and project each coord to U^perp after? the issue here is that we won't exactly get orthogonality anymore, right. but maybe we could do some different kind of projection instead? or maybe it's fine to move in these directions because they will just be sufficiently orthogonal? i guess maybe we can be fine with fucking things up on the rows a little? like maybe even random vectors in U^perp would work? no, the row fuckups scale also, right. make the vecs big, and these fuckups also become big. well, another possibility would be to project to the subspace of U^perp column matrices which have rows orthogonal to the given rows. this is the same as finding the closest such matrix in L^2. can we argue that this doesn't make stuff too small, say? consider the subspace of matrix space with cols in U^perp. this is a subspace of dimension $d(m-d)$. There is another subspace of matrix space with rows orthogonal to the given rows. this has dimension $dm-m=(d-1)m$ — it's almost everything. the two subspaces intersect in a subspace of dimension at least $d(m-d)-m$. actually, can we just say easily that this must have some pretty generic vectors? i guess we want to say that after projecting to this subspace, we still get some large dot products between the changes and existing other rows? this seems highly intuitively plausible, but how do we argue this?

hmm, i guess if we want to preserve row norms, we really need all the changes to have about the same size also, not just to all be orthogonal. maybe we can argue that taking a random matrix and projecting to orthogonal will indeed have all these properties? seems plausible! the point with all norms being the same is just the law of large numbers. 
