
# an example where the CLT gaussian is right even in the tail
Suppose you have a bunch of pairs $(X_i,Y_i)$ of correlated $\pm 1$ fair coinflips. More precisely, let's say that the covariance is $\mathbb{E}[X_i Y_i]-\mathbb{E}[X_i]\mathbb{E}[Y_i]=\mathbb{E}[X_i Y_i]=\rho$. We could equivalently say that they are sampled by first flipping a fair coin to get $X_i$ and then flipping it over with some probability $p=p(\rho)$ or not with probability $1-p$ to get $Y_i$; here, $\rho=\mathbb{E}[X_i Y_i]=(1-p)-p=1-2p$. You take $N$ jointly independent such pairs and consider the sums $X=\sum_{i=1}^N X_i$ and $Y=\sum_{i=1}^N Y_i$. The multivariate central limit theorem says that this gets close to a gaussian with mean $(0,0)$ and covariance matrix $\Sigma=\begin{bmatrix}N & N\rho \\ N \rho & N\end{bmatrix}$. But what is the distribution like when we condition on being in the far tail of $X$? For example, we could condition on all $\sum X_i = N$ — on every $X_i$ being heads. We could think of ourselves as already having sampled all these $X_i$ and then later sampling all the $Y_i$ by flipping them over with probability $p$, so our $Y=\sum Y_i$ will be a sum of $N$ independent $\pm 1$ coins which have probability $1-p$ of being $1$ and probability $p$ of being $-1$. So after this conditioning, $Y$ is approximately gaussian with mean $N(1-p-p)=N(1-2p)$ and variance $N\left(\mathbb{E}[Y_i^2]-\mathbb{E}[Y_i]^2\right)=N(1-(1-2p)^2)=4Np(1-p)$.

Now let's consider what happens when the CLT gaussian is conditioned on $X=N$. By https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multivariate_normal_distribution#Conditional_distributions , $Y$ now has mean $0+(N\rho/N)(N-0)=N\rho=N(1-2p)$, and $Y$ now has variance $N-(N\rho/N)N\rho=N(1-\rho^2)=N(1-(1-2p)^2)=4Np(1-p)$. These gaussian results actually do match the results for coinflips. So it looks like the CLT gaussian is just right about this particular tail question, actually!

# an example where the CLT gaussian is not right in the tail
Ok I think this was an accident though. Like, if you replace the coinflips with a random int from $\{-2,-1,0,1,2\}$, with some correlation between the two random ints, then surely this no longer works out generically. Yea I guess an easy thing we can do is saying that if $X_i=\pm 2$, then $Y_i=X_i$, and if $X_i\in\{-1,0,1\}$, then $Y_i$ is chosen independently of $X_i$ from the same set. Now when we look far enough into the tail in $X$, we get that $Y$ has much smaller variance than the CLT gaussian would think. In the extreme case, at the end of the tail we have all $X_i=2$ and $Y$ has $0$ variance given $X$, but the CLT gaussian doesn't have perfect correlation (because the middle values are independent) so it doesn't "predict" this variance of $Y$.