
Say we have a competition with $n$ participants, where the score in $\mathbb{R}$ of each participant is drawn independently from the same pdf $p(x)$ on $\mathbb{R}$. Call the cdf $c(x)=\int_{-\infty}^x p(x) dx$ We might be interested in ranking the students and studying the score of the $k$-th ranked student as a function of $k$. The pdf for the score of the $k$-th ranked draw can be found as follows. For the $k$-th ranked draw to end up being between $x$ and $x+dx$, we need there to be a draw in that range, we need there to be precisely $k-1$ draws above it, and we need there to be precisely $n-k$ draws below it. We have $n\cdot \binom{n-1}{k-1}$ ways to choose which draws are which. For a given choice, the probability of it working out precisely this way is $p(x)dx \cdot (1-c(x))^{k-1}c(x)^{n-k}$. The expected score of participant $k$ is thus $n\cdot \binom{n-1}{k-1}\int_{-\infty}^\infty(1-c(x))^{k-1}c(x)^{n-k} p(x) x dx=n\cdot \binom{n-1}{k-1}\int_{0}^1(1-c)^{k-1}c^{n-k} x(c) dc$, where $x(c)$ is the value of $x$ at fraction $c$ through the cdf, ie the inverse of $c(x)$. 

for high k, the function $a_k(c)=(1-c)^{k-1}c^{n-k}$ should become really concentrated around some c! so this integral will only have a contribution from some tiny region of $c$ and thus the expectation of $x$ is basically just the value of $x$ at that $c$. ok but what $c$, and wait, why is it so concentrated? ahh it is concentrated because the counts on each side of a point are concentrated. pick a point where they are concentrated around the desired ratio. then go a bit to the left or a bit to the right, and now you have concentration around different ratios. so the kth point must be in this small interval. so it is concentrated around the point where in expectation you have k-1 on the left and n-k on the right! that's just roughly the point at which the value of the cdf is k/n!

so the order statistic graph, from like 1% to 99%, just looks like the inverse function of the cdf!

