
people often talk about this stuff as if humans are 'close' to a local IGF optimum (see the algernon argument), but this isn't clear to me (i asked chatgpt to give reasons to think we are close to a local optimum and it imo didn't say anything useful)

this will be false because of a changing environment making a different loss landscape for us, but i want to even ignore that consideration and still say it's unclear. let's say we've spent 100k years, ie 5000 generations, in the same environment. i want to produce some upper bound for the iq gain from an SNP which 'just increases IQ and doesn't do anything else' and compare that to the iq gains from known SNPs


hmm there will defo be good local moves, surely? like new things are not tried out that often or something? ok but let's just consider variants already present 100k years ago and in a freely mixing population? (really can have much more to gain than this calculation suggests. it will give a really overly strong upper bound.) let's say something already had frequency 1/10 even 100k years ago. say it's at <9/10 now but useful. what's an upper bound on its usefulness?

chatgpt says that if igf gain from that SNP is s, then it takes $\propto \frac{1}{s}$ generations to do this, which seems very plausible from just thinking about it also, so i'll go with that without checking it further. so the order of magnitude of s will be at most 1/5000 for us (as an overly strong upper bound, remember). i guess maybe let's say having iq +3sd would double genetic fitness compared to iq 100 'all else equal'. (this is not actually true but it's fine for this calculation i think. we could imagine it being true, and the algernon lawyers would still want want this upper bound to be very small i feel like, to be secure in saying that SNPs which increase iq must make IGF not-better.) so our upper bound is that the SNP can give at most 3/5000=$6\times 10^{-5}$ sd extra. chatgpt claims people who believe in SNPs think you get 0.005 to 0.02 sd-s per allele. here the lower bound is 100 times larger, so i'll treat it this as a little evidence that the algern(on)ists are right in saying that the iq-increasing things at hand can't increase IGF? though ill note that we haven't really said much about novel iq-increasing mutations that have first appeared recently and haven't been fixed yet. ruling out that the iq-increasing SNPs are of this form, still being locally IGF-increasing, requires a separate calculation i think. also there's some const factor missing that for 10% to 90% is like 5 i think, and with this the lower end is only 20x from this bound. and then maybe we could replace 100k with 10k, and change sth about the free mixing, and maybe already get the upper bound to live in the given range or even be above the top end of the range? also chatgpt's numbers aren't to be trusted here. and definitely some other messiness also. anyway, this is all conditional on trusting the SNP iq people on some particular stuff, which i don't really — i don't really trust the claims that these SNPs really increase iq as much as they claim; it seems plausible to me that they did sth silly like: running a sparse linear regression, getting some regression coefficients, and then saying these are also effect sizes when you start to intervene. i'd need to look into what they've done more precisely to tell if they're being enormously silly here :)

thanks kirke joamets for discussion