I think "finding new alignment training tricks" is the kind of prosaic research that is closest to actually doing something useful in alignment, and I think this is plausible even with the qualifier "prosaic" removed. (There is a case for it doing more harm than good though, because better alignment training tricks imo make it falsely look to people like we are doing fine with the AGI problem, when I think we probably are not and should clearly stop AGI development.) I thought I'd spend some time generating a list of alignment training tricks. Various of these are already known and in use, but maybe some are new. When generating this list, I'll be assuming some sort of Anthropic/Constellation frame more than I actually endorse.

* various things from the literature off the top of my head:
	* pretraining on human text
	* fine-tuning on admirable thinking and behavior. just training on human ethical reasoning
	* RLHF
	* RLAIF
	* conditional pretraining
	* inoculation prompting
	* prefilling bad text (eg lying) and training to correct away from it. you can do this in a supervised way where you also prefill a good correction and train on the correction tokens but not the bad tokens. or you can RLHF i guess
	* adversarial training?
	* these depend a lot on human imitation stuff / staying in human language. so any ideas other than pretraining responsible for this also count. eg RL training with human trainers giving ideas
* If your goodness comes largely from having good first instincts, we can worry that it won't be preserved when you think seriously about stuff — like, you might think seriously and conclude you shouldn't do what intuitively looked good. In humans, when you reflect and act differently than your first instinct told you to, this is usually a good thing — (modulo some complications) the whatisgood-target is painted around the human[reflection/development]-arrow. But the target is not painted around the LLM[reflection/development]-arrow.
	* It could be that the instinctive views of an LLM are actually better than the views of an LLM after reflection. One could try to train an LLM to be such that its reflection agrees with its instincts, by just letting it reason about some problem and eventually rewarding it for coming to the instinctive answer, or maybe an answer from the distribution good reasonable smart humans would give upon currently feasible amounts of reflection.
	* One can also do RL against a grader that is just another copy with less time to think, who is prompted obviously not with the full CoT of the other model but instead just with some final report. Or maybe it could be prompted with the final report first and then later see the CoT, but being asked to judge if the model had been sneaky or something?
	* One can also try to collect cases where model reflection went awry, assuming one can still see that, and then have a careful human write a good continuation that sort of corrects the mistake (or you could have a differently prompted model do this), and then just train on these continuations.
* Somewhat more broadly/ambitiously than keeping chains of thought faithful, we can try to keep models human-like. Like, maybe one can get to pretty advanced AI with models that are well-described as doing human imitation ++. Here are some thoughts on this:
	* Consider ideas for improving and maintaining CoT legibility. Well, you could just train against a grader prompted with "does this CoTs look nice and faithful"...
	* One can try to just come up with pretraining compute multipliers. One can try pretraining on more detailed transcripts from researchers working on problems (wackier: maybe also involving brain scans?). One can think carefully about what aspects are more important to predict correctly vs superfluous. One can try to come up with training methods intermediate between pretraining and RL. One can try to come up with ways to keep RL closer to human imitation. For example, you do a version of RL where you have a model spend a lot of time and then eventually solve a problem, and at that point instead of doing a training step, you have a pre-this-type-of-RL model turn the messy long solution transcript into a streamlined way to think that arrives at the solution quickly, and then you train the model being RL-ed on that transcript. (I guess it's unclear if this is even correctly thought of as RL. It's iterated amplification and distillation. You can also do a version of this where the pre-this-type-of-training model turns the long transcript into many smaller problem + neat solution pairs that you then train on.)
	* One can try understanding stuff about how human lifetime learning works and implement analogues in language models... scary!
	* This is partly just a restatement of the high-level  point, but you want to push more in the direction of being a very adept user of human culture/understanding and less in the direction of being creative. For example, increase the ability to find relevant literature, internalize it quickly, and apply it as a fairly direct analogy; don't increase the ability to come up with toy problems of your own that you can learn your own novel lessons from. If you have to make a loop that makes an AI wield new concepts, still try to make that human-like.
	* One would want to have this: AI which solves problems in a way that shares many properties with how a human would solve those problems. This motivates considering some sort of LLM GAN setup. Can one come up with sth good here?
	* It'd be nice if one could somehow make human-like-ness "instrumentally protected". Like, some structures (e.g. ribosomes, ATP synthase) have been preserved by evolution for a very long time, in significant part because there are many constraints on them and they are used so much that changing them would break a lot of stuff. (Of course, evolution only tries somewhat small changes — it's a weaker designer-optimizer than an intelligent technologist — so it's easier to instrumentally protect structures from evolution.) Consider also the job advice of making yourself indispensable. So, maybe one can build capability-enhancing structures that depend on the AI's human-like-ness, and this would be a good direction in which to differentially push technological development. One example is that you might be able to build stuff in the direction of human-AI cyborg teams beating AIs alone for longer than would have happened by default; this puts pressure on the AI remaining human-like.
		* My sense is that it's pretty tough to make this work in a mad competitive world — the search space is just too big and almost all stuff in there is pushing you away from being human-like, but it still seems worth thinking more about and trying.
		* One pressure in this direction that is currently sort of present by default is that it's somewhat useful for capability research if AI behavior is understandable to AI designers. This could remain true over some development even if the AI designers are themselves AIs that are developed from current frontier AIs. However, over time, this will be moving away from human language, and it could easily move away catastrophically pretty early in only a few steps.
* ideas for training the AI to be honest. ideas for training the AI to be accurate when making claims about its own properties
* ideas for training the AI to keep its promises, or like to have such a thing as a promise, especially over long stretches. ideas for getting the AI to make promises
* ideas for keeping the AI more task-AGI-like. ideas for minimizing side effects and minimizing going off the rails