
suppose you have:
* the ability to assemble an arbitrary data set that is physically plausible
* after that, the ability to ask questions from various things like solomonoff induction (maybe there's a change in the laws of physics that makes that possible; i think we will be assuming that our universe is such that this isn't possible when the data set is made)

then can you get a lot of scientific progress?

# a scheme
* you get n great generalist researchers (they should be philosophically, mathematically, scientifically, technologically competent)
* we will assume we know how to hold really macroscopic things in quantum superposition. like, that we can have a room with a human working in it be separated well enough from the rest of the universe that it doesn't decohere for like a year (this is obviously completely out of reach currently, but maybe it's not impossible?)
* we put our $n$ researchers in $n$ different such rooms, with the task to try to work on some research question(s) given to them in a prompt. we use quantum randomness to generate a random text prompt of arbitrary length. the text will with extremely high probability be complete nonsense. let's say that a researcher should really try to see if there is anything sensible in there and work on that if there is, but if they can't find anything after spending like a week, it's fine if they just spend their year working on whatever they want. by the end of the year, they should produce a new text file.
* actually, maybe we can avoid having to do macroscopic superposition if we just bring the rooms pairwise at least one lightyear away from each other before quantum-generating the individual random prompts? i think the thing i'm trying to avoid with this is the ability for an eventual predictor to learn too much about the work other scientists actually did in a universe from the work some scientists did in that universe, because that would make prompts that were not actually given in that universe more weirdly out of distribution
* now you collect this input->output data set from the rooms
* you show some random subset to solomonoff function induction, and then ask it to give the output on a legit question you're interested in
* you can try to combine this with task decomposition: you have the initial prompt ask the scientist to eventually output a prompt to a next scientist. for example, they could be improving a library of textbooks

a few remarks on the setup:
* you could also do this with better prompts. that is, either good questions only, or a mixed distribution. i think this is a distraction if one wants to get task decomposition working, because one needs generalization to prompts you wouldn't have given anyway in that case. but it's fine to do this if one just wants more answers to questions one already has, with the answers being of the sort that can be generated by these scientists in a year. then it probably is an improvement to do that


# does this work?

idk. on outside view, probably not. i don't really understand this well on inside view atm. but one observation:
* if the shortest program looks at you having made the data set, then you are probably screwed, because overwhelmingly, the quantum mass in which you write a legitimate question there has the answer nowhere to be found around it
* well, i guess you could maybe do your call to the hypercomputer before you have the actual query inputs around? like, you could be handed a device that gives an output distribution on each input, and then you could use that? well there should still be this failure mode of looking at the actual universe in which you did this and the output for the other legit queries was nowhere to be found?
* you want the shortest program to look at the broader randomized process you are instantiating...


# messy notes

* what should i output to maximize the number of strange quarks?
* well how is it doing that? thinking 