(the title is somewhat tongue-in-cheek)

* you have mental models, ways of thinking about things. sometimes they succeed to an extent — they well-answer some specific questions.
	* a canonical example: you have a program running on a physical computer in front of you, and you reason about it (eg estimate its runtime) largely by doing sth like thinking about an abstract version of that program (like, you could just think about a corresponding mathematical object)
* the real thing is kind of like a model-in-the-sense-of-model-theory of your model (which would be like a theory in the sense of model theory). the real thing and your way of thinking conform to each other (in certain respects, almost always not in most respects). like, you conclude that the program should run for on the order of 1 second, and then it really does! if we want to be more concrete, we could say that your way of thinking makes some correct predictions, but these aren't really predictions of raw data, but of high-level facts you have many ways of tracking (eg what is predicted is the runtime of a program, which you can then measure in many ways). that said, when you check a prediction, that is of course mediated through raw activations of your sensory organs, but that's somewhat like how it's mediated through configurations of the outer membrane of some object you're looking at or through photons or some intermediate layer of neuron activations or whatever; your predictions are not ultimately about these raw first activations any more than they are about these various other mediating things).
	* if you want something very concrete, consider again the program example. let's say you are thinking of it as a mathematical object, ultimately a set in ZFC. you have a programming language that lets you empirically ask certain queries about the program, eg "how long does it run?", "what is the first item of this list after this operation?", "what is the type of this object?", "is this function ever called?", etc. (these are answered by some precisely specified program that gets to examine the execution of the first program). there are "bridge laws" translating these questions into questions in ZFC. let's say your "thinking" about the program is just a brute force proof search in ZFC. when you're interested in one of these questions about the program, you translate it into a ZFC statement (or statement template, in case the question is asking for the value of a variable) and then execute your brute force proof search (to fix behavior on things which are not provable: maybe you only search through proofs of up to a certain very long length, and then output you don't know if you still haven't found anything by the end)
* individual words, concepts, phrases, sentences contribute to building up a model. there are also bigger model components, eg supply and demand thinking or force-based thinking
* there is a dance where you have a way of thinking, you have some things it helps you with but also some failures to answer questions correctly or (otherwise) well-support action, then better ways of thinking, their failures, etc
* 