

Suppose that there is a set of background latent variable settings $M$, and let's say that for each $m\in M$, there is a fact of the matter about whether intervening by doing $a$ would cause harm, and whether intervening by doing $\bot$ would cause harm. We can partition $M$ according to the $2\times 2=4$ settings of these two variables as follows:
$$M=M_{(a\to h)\land (\bot \to h)}\cup M_{(a\to h)\land (\bot \to (\neg h))}\cup M_{(a\to (\neg h))\land (\bot \to h)}\cup M_{(a\to (\neg h))\land (\bot \to (\neg h))}.$$
(Hopefully the notation makes sense.) The maximum across all partitions $S_1,\ldots,S_k$ of the sum $\sum_i P(S_i,h|\text{ do }A=a)1_{e(S_i,a)>\epsilon}=\sum_{i\text{ s.t. }e(S_i,a)>\epsilon} P(S_i,h|\text{ do }A=a)$ has a simple description in terms of the measures of the four events above: it's $$\min\left(P\left(M_{(a\to h)\land (\bot \to h)}\right)+P\left(M_{(a\to h)\land (\bot \to (\neg h))}\right),\frac{P\left(M_{(a\to h)\land (\bot \to (\neg h))}\right)}{\epsilon}\right).$$
In words, this is saying that we can always pick a partition that makes the sum the smaller one of the two following quantities:
* the probability that doing $a$ leads to harm;
* $1/\epsilon$ times the probability that doing $a$ leads to harm but doing $\bot$ wouldn't've.

Proof of the claim about the max (not super detailed). That the proposed quantity is an upper bound on the supremum follows from the fact that each of the two terms in the minimum is an upper bound on $\sum_{i\text{ s.t. }e(S_i,a)>\epsilon} P(S_i,h|\text{ do }A=a)$.
* The first term is an upper bound because it is simply $\sum_{i} P(S_i,h|\text{ do }A=a)$.
* The second term is an upper bound because of the following. We can note that we're always better off dropping parts of $S_i$ which intersect with $M_{(a\to (\neg h))\land (\bot \to h)}\cup M_{(a\to (\neg h))\land (\bot \to (\neg h))}$ (i.e., this can only increase the sum). After doing so, each $S_i$ that appears in the sum needs to have at least an $\epsilon$ fraction in $M_{(a\to h)\land (\bot \to (\neg h))}$. It follows that the total probability of all the $S_i$ which appear in the sum is at most $\frac{P\left(M_{(a\to h)\land (\bot \to (\neg h))}\right)}{\epsilon}$, so $\sum_{i\text{ s.t. }e(S_i,a)>\epsilon} P(S_i,h|\text{ do }A=a)\leq \sum_{i\text{ s.t. }e(S_i,a)>\epsilon} P(S_i|\text{ do }A=a)\leq \frac{P\left(M_{(a\to h)\land (\bot \to (\neg h))}\right)}{\epsilon}$.
The minimum of the two bounds is also attainable — there is a construction of a partition with that value for the sum. If the second term is smaller than the first, then just picking $S_1$ to be the union of $M_{(a\to h)\land (\bot \to (\neg h))}$ with a subset of $M_{(a\to h)\land (\bot \to h)}$ of measure $P\left(M_{(a\to h)\land (\bot \to (\neg h))}\right)\left(\frac{1}{\epsilon}-1\right)$ will work. If the first term is smaller than the second, then just pick $S_1=M_{(a\to h)\land (\bot \to h)}\cup M_{(a\to h)\land (\bot \to (\neg h))}$. This completes the proof.

