


I was reading https://arxiv.org/pdf/2405.06624 and found myself disagreeing strongly with almost everything in a particular sequence of thoughts on the potential difficulty with specifying a world model in which harm (etc.) can be specified, which prompted me to write up my criticisms of some particular claims — these are below.

> Note that in many cases, it will likely be necessary for the world model to model the behaviour of humans. Moreover, humans are very complex, and it seems dubious to presuppose that it is possible to create a model of human behaviour that is both interpretable and highly accurate (especially noting that such a model itself would constitute an AGI system). There may thus in some cases be a fundamental trade-off between interpretability and predictive accuracy. However, note that interpretability can be maintained if human behaviour is modelled using nondeterminism. (Here “nondeterminism” should be understood in the same sense as in “nondeterministic automata” and “nondeterministic Turing machines”, rather than as a synonym for “probabilistic”. In other words, the world model may specify a set or class of possible (potentially stochastic) behaviours for each human, and require the verifier to validate the safety specification for each behaviour profile in this set or class.)

If I'm understanding correctly that the claim here is that one can leave (meaningful parts of) what humans are like unspecified and require that a formal argument be provided which shows that a proposed (interesting) action sequence is safe regardless of what humans are like, then I strongly doubt such an argument exists in any interesting case, because it will simply be false for any interesting action sequence that it is safe regardless of what humans are like.


Here's a longer quote for context — I'll argue against some particular points from here which 
> A potential argument against the GS research agenda is that the world may be so complex that it is infeasible even in principle to create a sufficiently accurate world model. We have several responses to this point. First of all, a world model can (and should) of course include model uncertainty, and this uncertainty can be taken into account when the safety specifications are verified. In this way, the strength of the resulting formal guarantees will be appropriately sensitive to the reliability of the world model. Moreover, many of the most concerning loss-of-control scenarios with advanced AI systems involve cases where the AI is assumed to be able to generate and execute complicated plans with high reliability. In other words, it is reasonable to assume that if AI systems can be powerful enough to pose a serious danger to humanity, then it is possible to create sufficiently accurate world models. Finally, we would like to note that this argument essentially is fully general. Any strategy for creating safe AI systems must rely on some beliefs or assumptions about the real world, and these assumptions could be wrong; a world model simply makes these assumptions explicit. Stated differently, if it is impossible to create world models that are sufficiently accurate to ensure that an AI system adheres to some specification, then it is presumably in general impossible to ensure that this specification is satisfied by that system.

"In other words, it is reasonable to assume that if AI systems can be powerful enough to pose a serious danger to humanity, then it is possible to create sufficiently accurate world models."

When AI-which-could-do-science exists, it's plausible that AI-which-could-build-practical-world-models will also exist or at least be close to existing. This does not imply that humans will be able to use such an AI system to build good world models — the system might not in fact do what we'd like it to do. This is analogous to: humans mightn't be able to use a system which could solve alignment to solve alignment — a central worry.

"Finally, we would like to note that this argument essentially is fully general. Any strategy for creating safe AI systems must rely on some beliefs or assumptions about the real world, and these assumptions could be wrong; a world model simply makes these assumptions explicit. Stated differently, if it is impossible to create world models that are sufficiently accurate to ensure that an AI system adheres to some specification, then it is presumably in general impossible to ensure that this specification is satisfied by that system."

Yes, any strategy for creating safe AI systems will be supported by some reasons; making reasons 

CHANGE OF MIND: I guess they have the "even in principle" there which makes the entire thing boring, but maybe the claims less objectionable (though some claims then become irrelevant I guess).