Suppose I use the following algorithm for learning boolean functions $f\colon \{-1,1\}^d \to \{-1,1\}$. I have all boolean circuits, with some reasonable convention for writing down circuits (eg I have to say what sort of gate and what input variables it gets, giving each gate a name, listing all gates in some order). Given a boolean function $f$, let the complexity $C(f)$ mean the smallest description length in this language of a circuit which implements the function $f$. Among functions of the same complexity, break ties by just ordering their shortest descriptions as binary integers, so we have a total ordering on all functions by complexity. Then, the learner will be receiving some input-output $(x_i,y_i=f(x_i))$ pairs from an unknown function $f$. Our learning algorithm is to guess next outputs $y_{i+1}^*$ on $x_{i+1}$ with the simplest function compatible with the data so far. We could call this learning algorithm "occam circuit learning", as it guesses according to the simplest hypothesis compatible with the data so far. I'm interested in understanding whether this is a good learning algorithm.

It is fairly easy to prove the following in-distribution learning result for this learning algorithm:

> Theorem. Fix an arbitrary distribution on the input space $\{-1,1\}^d$ (eg uniform). After seeing $1000000 \cdot C(f)$ input-output pairs, with probability $>0.99$ (on which input-output pairs we happen to sample), the simplest surviving function gets $>0.99$ test accuracy (measured against that same distribution).

Pf sketch. Consider all those circuits simpler than the simplest circuit implementing $f$ which have less than $0.99$ test accuracy. Each one is exponentially likely to get ruled out by the data seen. A union bound then gives that with all but exponentially small probability, they all get ruled out. After this, the simplest remaining circuit must either be the smallest circuit implementing $f$ or some circuit smaller than it which has $>0.99$ test accuracy.

However, I don't know if an out-of-distribution learning result is also true in this setting. My guess is that this is probably "morally true", at least for "generic ways to order inputs" but I can't prove any such result. There is the following statement which can be given a "physicist's proof".

Claim. Fix some ordering of all $2^d$ possible inputs. Apply this learning algorithm online, counting mistakes. The number of mistakes will be at most $1000000 \cdot C(f)$. 

"Physicist's proof." Suppose that when the smallest remaining circuit guesses wrong, at least $1\%$ of those times, also at least $1\%$ of the circuits between that circuit and the smallest circuit implementing $f$ guess wrong. Then on average every mistake gets rid of like $1/10000$ of the remaining bad functions. Since there are only at most $2^{C(f)}$ of those, this can only be repeated at most $1000000 \cdot C(f)$ times.

My question is whether this sort of thing can be given a rigorous proof or a counterexample. Perhaps this is already known in the literature?

I have the following counterexample for a specific weird circuit language, picking a specific weird input ordering for it. Say that the function we are learning is $0$ and our circuit language considers it really natural for there to be one specific memorization of an input being $1$, considering this simpler than the $0$ function for any input. Then there can be like $2^{C(0)}$ of these memorizing guys. We construct an input sequence which probes each memorization input in order of complexity, so we keep guessing wrong for like $2^{C(0)}$ times before finally starting to guess $0$. But this is a weird example, both in that the circuit language is bizarre, and in that this is not going to work for most structured input sequences, only very specific adversarial ones.