I'd like to better understand how and whether existence matters.
* here's one case to consider:
	* Suppose that you find out that our universe is run on a computer in a bigger universe (maybe imagine that our universe is fundamentally some sort of game of life thing). Suppose that you further find out that there are simulators looking at what's going on inside our world and they have decided to start running an exact second copy of our universe on a second computer if and only if there is a $>5$ kg tungsten cube in the Mariana trench in 30 days. (Let's assume that this bigger universe is somehow such that it is guaranteed that neither computer would ever be stopped in any case. Let's suppose that there's no randomness so the second computer will run the literal same thing in parallel, not a diverging version. With our actual laws of physics, maybe this means that we have to imagine it time-evolving the entire wavefunction of the universe forward with all its branches. Let's also suppose that the simulators are not interested in anything else about our universe — they will never look at our universe again after checking for whether a tungsten cube is in the Mariana trench, so there's not a way for us to break out of our box via them.)
	* Should you place a tungsten cube in the Mariana trench? 
		* On the one hand, maybe this is vastly important, because it doubles the amount of cool stuff in existence in the big universe!
		* On the other hand, maybe this doesn't matter, because it doesn't affect the lives of guys in our universe in any way.
	* When I hold this question alone in mind, then I feel like guessing that it doesn't matter. But I'm not happy with where this takes me in other cases.
* here's another case to consider:
	* classic doubled wire computer thing. should you want to be run on thicker wires <=> should you want many copies of you in our universe (well, arguably iff). maybe you don't want thicker wires, and then you don't want more copies?
* but now: if you don't want exact copies, then maybe you don't want rough copies either? like, it doesn't feel like it has some huge moral significance whether you allow a guy to interact a little bit with the rest of your universe vs not? so then you maybe shouldn't care about creating guys that much in general, at least not for the sake of these guys; you might still care about creating guys for the sake of your civilization. maybe this could be a general principle: when you create a guy, care about them after, but don't create them for their sake
* but what if every possible thing exists in some sense... what if there is a big universe in which all possible gameoflife worlds are being run, including our world. what if all the humans you could create in our world already exist somewhere else? didn't we want to conclude earlier that running someone another time probably makes no difference? but then every time you run someone, you just run them another time
	*  maybe even if this isn't true (well idk what it means for it to be true or false really but let's say that makes sense somehow), what we ought to do should be the same independently of this? like: maybe some fact about how many inflationary bubbles that we can't physically interact with there were shouldn't have profound moral significance — maybe our actions should be independent of such facts about other universes?
* if it is true that instantiating more guys in your universe has no moral significance, then 
* maybe this suggests in general: we shouldn't be making humans who have happy lives; we should be growing as a civilization instead

a caveat:
* if it is true that one shouldn't create humans for their own sake, then this is a fact about human-shoulds, not a necessary fact about should-systems in general, i think. like, there could be a guy who really wants to have more "existence-measure" and another guy who cares about that guy and should create that guy. i think this is a possible way for should-ing to be. it's plausible should-ing is fairly convergently not like this though, if my above argument goes through — it seems plausible that something like this would be compelling to quite many guys 

