in analytic metaethics and ethics, i think there’s a lot of work aiming to understand how to decide between some given options — which of some given actions to take, which of some given virtues to cultivate — and less work on coming up with these options — possibilizing. like sure, to act, one needs to decide what to do, but it’s not like we are deciding between options which are simply given to us — typically, the options need to be conceived of by us, and this is highly non-trivial. i’m starting to take seriously the possibility that we (as metaethicists / philosophers of thinking) should think much more about the question of how to come up with new options, as well as the possibility that we (as ethicists) should be significantly more in the business of developing new options. perhaps pareto is the final frontier!

an analogy to philosophy of science: in phil of sci, there is a lot of work on the relatively easier/[more boring] question of how to pick between theories, but most of the interesting stuff happens when coming up with theories, about which little is understood, but about which there probably is very much to be understood. similarly, in metaethics, there is a lot of work on the easier and plausibly more boring question of how to choose between options, with little said about coming up with options in the first place (at least explicitly and afaik)

an analogy to science: choosing between theories is easier/[more boring] than coming up with theories

i feel like taking [ethical possibilizing]/[the development of ethical technologies] (by possibilizing i basically just mean coming up with plans. a technology is like a plan-component here. it remains to be seen if an ethical component can be extracted) seriously — if it is indeed right to do so, which to my mind is tbd — could really matter! like i think it might be really great for there to be many more philosophy papers which introduce new ethical technologies. that said, minimally there's a blurry line between ethical technologies and other technologies, and really i'm not yet convinced the category 'ethical technology' is enough of a thing. under the development of ethical technologies, i mean to include things like: coming up with a promise-like thing which misses some downsides; coming up with a good protocol for administering reward signal to one’s friends; developing a better methodology for a parent to guide/constrain/control their child with the child’s own interest in mind; conceiving of a new virtue

i think my ask/proposal is not that we immediately write something on this, but that for now we just keep this in mind — look out for examples, figure out for ourselves if it makes sense, understand the relative importance of possibilizing vs choice, take notes. that said, i’m also open to making sense of this by just getting started on a draft. also lmk if u think this has already been done / if u happen to come across existing things which are close to this (i asked chatgpt for relevant literature and it claimed some things had to do with this but then i looked at those things and they actually didn't even seem to understand the topic to the extent i'm describing it here so maybe no one has said anything very clear about this obvious thing yet?)

btw i like that this rhymes with (y)our paper on moral experimentation not only in that it aims to do something significant but also in that it (de)colonizewe are deciding between options which are simply given to us — typically, the options need to be conceived of by us, and this is highly non-trivial. i’m starting to take seriously the possibility that we (as metaethicists / philosophers of thinking) should think much more about the question of how to come up with new options, as well as the possibility that we (as ethicists) should be significantly more in the business of developing new options. perhaps pareto is the final frontier!

an analogy to philosophy of science: in phil of sci, there is a lot of work on the relatively easier/[more boring] question of how to pick between theories, but most of the interesting stuff happens when coming up with theories, about which little is understood, but about which there probably is very much to be understood. similarly, in metaethics, there is a lot of work on the easier and plausibly more boring question of how to choose between options, with little said about coming up with options in the first place (at least explicitly and afaik)

an analogy to science: choosing between theories is easier/[more boring] than coming up with theories

i feel like taking [ethical possibilizing]/[the development of ethical technologies] (by possibilizing i basically just mean coming up with plans. a technology is like a plan-component here. it remains to be seen if an ethical component can be extracted) seriously — if it is indeed right to do so, which to my mind is tbd — could really matter! like i think it might be really great for there to be many more philosophy papers which introduce new ethical technologies. that said, minimally there's a blurry line between ethical technologies and other technologies, and really i'm not yet convinced the category 'ethical technology' is enough of a thing. under the development of ethical technologies, i mean to include things like: coming up with a promise-like thing which misses some downsides; coming up with a good protocol for administering reward signal to one’s friends; developing a better methodology for a parent to guide/constrain/control their child with the child’s own interest in mind; conceiving of a new virtue

i think my ask/proposal is not that we immediately write something on this, but that for now we just keep this in mind — look out for examples, decide for ourselves if it makes sense, understand the relative importance of possibilizing vs choice, take notes. (that said, i’m also open to making sense of this by just getting started on a draft). also lmk if u think this has already been done / if u happen to come across existing things which are close to this (i asked chatgpt for relevant literature and it claimed some things had to do with this but then i looked at those things and they didn't even seem to understand the topic to the extent i'm describing it now so maybe no one has said anything very clear about this obvious thing yet?)

btw i like that this rhymes with (y)our paper on moral experimentation not only in that it aims to do something significant but also in that it (de)colonizes the term ‘ethical technology’ from the bioethics (etc) degenerates

(autobiographical context: basically, i spent 1.5 years slowly going from thinking “pareto is the final frontier? what woo woo nonsense cringe! yea why don’t we replace the meat industry with everyone eating unicorns that taste great and have the optimal nutrient profile and are happy and live full lives of mathematico-philosophical reflection and want to be eaten and are carbon-neutrals the term ‘ethical technology’ from the bioethics (etc) degenerates

(autobiographical context: roughly, i spent 1.5 years slowly going from thinking “pareto is the final frontier? what peak woo woo cringe nonsense! yea why don’t we replace eating meat as it is now with everyone eating unicorns that taste great and have the optimal nutrient profile and are happy and live full lives of mathematico-philosophical reflection and want to be eaten and are carbon-negative. why don't we just have more along every axis tracking some kind of goodness. incredible ideas. now let us return to the real problem of figuring out how to make tough choices” to thinking “wait… maybe pareto being the final frontier is based actually?”)


# themes in the development of ethical technologies

* reconciliation/making-coherent: coming up with a plan which satisfies some hopes/wishes/values which initially seem to be in tension/almost-contradiction with each other. for example, there is a tension between children being enslaved to their parents and children grossly neglecting their future selves. a tension is often resolved by seeing and letting loose an implicit assumption — relaxing the framework so that the contradiction goes away (eg seeing special relativity came from trying to make it be possible that all reference frames are equivalent (including having the same speed of light) which required loosening/changing a particular conception of universal time/space, stepping out of a framework where there is a universal time)

# loose ideas

the thing where you try to wiggle out of a trolley problem by suggesting a third option is maybe locally annoying. but that move is really very important!



# (potential) examples of developings of ethical technologies

* coming up with a promise-like thing which misses some downsides
* coming up with a good protocol for administering reward signal to one’s friends
* developing a better methodology for a parent to guide/constrain/control their child with the child’s own interest in mind
* conceiving of a new virtue
* figuring out how to replace recommendation letters in academia with something less nepotistic which still provides at least as much of the same kind of information about a person
* figuring out a way to assign credit to everyone that contributes to an academic paper such that each additional bit of work increases one's attribution score (and coming up with a replacement for the h-index or the citation count which aggregates these attribution scores more appropriately)



# mess

in ethics, i think there’s a lot of focus on how to decide between given options — which of some given actions to take, which of some given virtues to cultivate — and less work on the process of coming up with options — possibilizing. like sure, to act, one needs to decide what to do, but it’s not like the options are simply given to us — typically, the options need to be conceived of by us, and this is highly non-trivial. i’m starting to take seriously the possibility that we (ie philosophers) should think much more about the metaethical (?) question of how to come up with new options, as well as the possibility that we (ie ethicists) should be significantly more in the business of developing new options. perhaps pareto is the final frontier!

an analogy to philosophy of science: in phil of sci, there is a lot of work on the relatively easier/[more boring] question of how to pick between theories, but most of the interesting stuff happens when coming up with theories, about which little is understood, but about which there probably is very much to be understood. similarly, in metaethics, there is a lot of work on the easier and plausibly more boring question of how to choose between options, but a bunch of stuff 

an analogy to science: choosing between theories is easier/[more boring] than coming up with theories

i feel like taking [ethical possibilizing]/[the development of ethical technologies] (by possibilizing i just mean coming up with plans. a technology is sorta a plan-component. it remains to be seen if an ethical component can be extracted) seriously — if it is indeed right to do so, which to my mind is tbd — could really matter! like i think it might be really great for there to be many more philosophy papers which introduce new ethical technologies (that said, minimally there's a blurry line between ethical technologies and other technologies, and really i'm not yet convinced the category 'ethical technology' is enough of a thing. under the development of ethical technologies, i mean to include things like: coming up with a promise-like thing which misses some downsides; coming up with a good protocol for administering reward signal to one’s friends; developing a better methodology for a parent to guide/constrain/control their child with the child’s own interest in mind; conceiving of a new virtue). 

i think my ask/proposal is not that we immediately write something on this, but that for now we just keep this in mind — look out for examples, decide for ourselves if it makes sense, understand the relative importance of possibilizing vs choice, take notes. (that said, i’m also open to making sense of this by just writing a draft). also lmk if u think this has already been done / if u happen to come across existing things which are close to this

btw i like that this rhymes with (y)our paper on moral experimentation not only in that it aims to do something significant but also in that it (de)colonizes the term ‘ethical technology’ from the bioethics (etc) degenerates


(autobiographical context: basically, i spent 1.5 years slowly going from thinking “pareto is the final frontier? what woo woo nonsense cringe! yea why don’t we replace the meat industry with everyone eating unicorns that taste great and have the optimal nutrient profile and are happy and live full lives of mathematico-philosophical reflection and want to die. thank you for your idea. now let us return to the real problem of figuring out how to make tough choices” to thinking “wait… maybe pareto being the final frontier is based actually?”)
