
the issue is of course that we can be concerned that the system in which such a proof is provided could be unsound. in particular, if we're providing a proof in a 'strictly stronger' system, then the inconsistency of the weaker system would imply the inconsistency of the stronger system, in which case it could prove that the weaker system is inconsistent (because it could prove anything). so if anything, it seems like the existence of a proof that the weaker system is sound in a stronger system should make us update toward thinking that the weaker system is more likely to be inconsistent, not more likely to be consistent! (indeed, it must update us in this direction weakly)

does this really describe the update we should make on the consistency of PA when, say, someone constructs the von neumann naturals in ZFC and proves that they provide a model of PA? i think it's plausible that in such a case (more generally: when a human provides a proof of the consistency of a weaker model in a still-trusted large model), we should update toward thinking PA is more likely to be consistent after all (maybe as long as ZFC hasn't been found to be inconsistent, anyway), even though we should update as described above upon an oracle telling us whether a proof of PA's consistency exists in ZFC. i'll need to think more about this, but maybe this has to do with a 'nice human proof' that 'doesn't obviously point to the system being inconsistent' plausibly not existing if PA were inconsistent, or something? or maybe it's just like the usual thing of trusting things in ZFC? but maybe this doesn't work here because it is sorta conditioning on ZFC being consistent which implies that PA is consistent anyway, or something? 