
one often hears that mathematics is just a symbol-juggling game. while i consider there to be some truth to this, i don't want to analyze its truth directly here. instead, i'd like to point out that this comparison of math to a game can make math feel like something that's already understood, already seen from the outside, already understood, encapsulable, flat, mere, dull. and i'd like now make some math-game comparisons that hopefully make both math and games appear rich!:
* when you play, say, ticket to ride (a board game i recommend) with your friends, eg where does the eventual game score calculation live? it has to do with some immediately physical things (where your rail pieces are, which ticket cards you have), but it doesn't live entirely in the 'physical world' alone — moving your score-keeping button to square $115$ at will does not in fact make your score $115$ in the game that you are playing together (you shouldn't be using the score-keeping buttons anyway btw — in ticket to ride, that's idiotic — but that's beside the point) (and yes-yes, all processes are eventually in physics in some sense — i don't think the thing i'm trying to say contradicts with this). it's more like: there's an abstract structure, the ticket to ride game (abstract edition), that the physical process consisting of the game pieces and you and your comrades is [relating to]/tracking/implementing. this also happens when you are trying to solve a mathematical problem with a friend: there are these abstract structures (that are maybe inside just one abstract structure, if you like to make everything in math live in set theory) that you both are simultaneously [relating to]/tracking, or you together are [relating to]/tracking. wtf is that 'relating to' like? how do 'the same natural numbers' get implemented in both of your heads? how is it that you two together figure out something about the distribution of primes? what is it for something in physics to come to [relate to]/track something abstract/eternal? 
* 