
an argument for why different kinds of mathematics should 'feel the same':
* any branch of math can probably be seen as a subbranch of any rich branch of math, because one can interpret problems in one into problems in the other
	* a construction method: as long as one is fine with replacing statements with claims about the existence of a proof of those statements (nb whether this is really fine requires further though), one can turn any theorem into a statement about that theorem being provable into a statement about some turing machine halting (or some statement involving recursive functions on the natural numbers); as long as one can then embed a statement about a particular turing machine halting in another branch of mathematics (e.g. a turing machine halting can be turned into there being a graph with such-and-such properties or such-and-such a diophantine equation having a solution), one has an algorithm for embedding all of mathematics inside a particular branch of mathematics
* so, anything in mathematics can be seen as living inside any rich branch of mathematics. so we could do anything inside any branch. so there has to be a way to do algebra that feels like doing analysis? or maybe so different kinds of math aren't that different after all? (the argument is sketchy here as well)

a counterargument:
* sure, you can reinterpret all of math in various ways. but this reinterpretation sends all of a rich branch to just some small and potentially very weird subbranch of another branch. this other branch has not had any (prior) reason to develop tools to handle this subbranch — its tools are tailored to handle a very different distribution of questions; they can turn out not to say anything interesting about the image of your translation. for example, people studying diophantine equations study equations of low degree, e.g. elliptic curves. if you translate the riemann hypothesis into some TM not halting (i think we needn't go through provability for this particular case — this is not trivial but i won't explain further atm) and then translate that into a diophantine equation, then you'll get some monstrosity with lots of variables. the tools developed to study elliptic curves won't be of much use for telling whether this monstrous equation has a soln.

incidentally:
* if translations are easy to come by, why bother building new ones ( e.g., the [Langlands](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Langlands_program) [program](https://youtu.be/_bJeKUosqoY) )?
	* continuing the line of thought above: it is valuable to construct mappings [of questions (objects, theorems) from one branch of mathematics into another] whose image is particularly in-distribution for the other branch, so that the image-questions can then be studied using methods native to the other branch. (this is in contrast with a translation which takes natural questions from one branch to some set of questions in another branch which is weird/unnatural from the POV of the other branch — the other branch will struggle to bring its understanding to bear on these questions that appear weird to it)