
# solomonoff fucks with your sense that mathematical facts are already determined
* Say you're a being who has evolved in a gridworld from some initial seed with low kolmogorov complexity.
* You might think that, say, the top prediction of solomonoff induction after some given initial segment is a "determined mathematical fact". Indeed, you might think that you could reason about this mathematical fact, and that you could take actions depending on what you figure out.
* like: It seems intuitive to think that in some sort of universal time, facts about solomonoff induction "arrive first" (like, are determined first), and then facts about the result of your reasoning process "arrive" (if your reasoning process about solomonoff induction is any good, its result will be in part determined by those facts about solomonoff induction), and then your actions "arrive".
* !however: We can cook up cases where there must be something wrong with this picture. The basic idea here is that solomonoff can see your computable actions, which is in a lot of tension with you seeing solomonoff's actions before taking them — like, you actually come before solomonoff in "mathematical time".
* for instance: We could perhaps have you decide to pick your favorite sorta-complicated sequence to broadcast along a simple-to-specify channel in your universe — maybe just make a very big screen that can switch between black and white to "broadcast" 0 vs 1, and display the sequence along that. Let's say that at some point you will be reasoning about what Solomonoff says will come next in the sequence, and then putting whichever of 0 or 1 you think Solomonoff thinks is less likely to come next. Now, if the simplest way to specify the sequence up to that point is by specifying it being broadcast in your universe, then Solomonoff will really be making the correct prediction here, so you must always be wrong about what Solomonoff says will come next — or well, if you are assigning probabilities, then perhaps at best you could be at $1:1$.
	* I guess you could take this example to just show that you sometimes can't reason well about solomonoff induction. But I think you should also see that the reason for that in this example is that you have to make your move before solomonoff makes its move, not the other way around.
* Hmm, but maybe you can mostly reason well about solomonoff induction anyway, somewhat like how you can still make various predictions about what will happen in the world despite anti-inductive elements being possible?

# solomonoff can be trolled
* There is probably some fairly low kolmogorov complexity computable universe in which beings can arise and start broadcasting sequences if they want to. If such a thing is simpler to specify than the primes, then they could just decide to change what the solomonoff-right prediction is to make after seeing $2,3,5,7,11,13,17,19,23,29,31,37,\ldots$. That's really weird!
* Hmm, but this is presumably quite rare, right? Like, maybe we can sorta know that most sequences like  $2,3,5,7,11,13,17,19,23,29,31,37,\ldots$ are not getting trolled? 