
notes taken while watching https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w3f8KEcv4RE

We have some space of functions $\mathbb{R}\to\mathbb{C}$ — well, not exactly a space of functions, but $L^2(\mathbb{R})$, which doesn't exactly consist of functions, but ykno something close to functions. We define the Fourier transform of a function $f(x)$ as $\hat{f}(y)=\int f(x)e^{2\pi i x y}\text{d} x$.

Now, notice that $\mathbb{R}$ has a group structure given by addition, which induces a family of linear operators on $L^2(\mathbb{R})$ given by $(T_t(f))(x)=f(x+t)$ — its translating the functions. Since these operators commute with each other, it seems reasonable to ask for a simultaneous eigenbasis for all of them. Ignoring concerns about the Fourier basis not really living in our space, we can note that they are indeed eigenfunctions: for $f(x)=e^{2\pi i y x}$, we have $T_t(f)=T_t(e^{2\pi i y x})=e^{2\pi i y t} e^{2\pi i y x}$ — each fourier basis element simply picks up a phase under any translation. Indeed, I think one can show that the exponential functions in $x$ are the unique functions which are simultaneous eigenfunctions of all of these. It seems plausible that some kind of orthonormality requirement would let us go all the way to pinning down the fourier basis uniquely (i.e. getting rid of any non-imaginary exponential terms). Requiring const norm also does it, but seems less principled. But I won't finish this line of thought atm.

How would we go about generalizing the Fourier transform to functions from some other group $G$ to $\mathbb{C}$? For an abelian group, we can note that there is again a commuting family of linear operators on the vector space of functions from $G$ to $\mathbb{C}$ given by $(T_g f)(h)=f(gh)$ — perhaps the fourier basis would again be a simultaneous eigenbasis for this family, and the fourier transform would simply give the coeffs of the function in this basis. If $f$ is an eigenfunction of each $T_g$ with eigenvalue $\lambda(g)$, then we have $f(g)=f(g1)=\lambda(g)f(1)$ and $f(gh)=\lambda(g)f(h)=\lambda(g)\lambda(h)f(1)$, so up to dividing through by $f(1)$ (which is nonzero since $f$ is, so we can indeed divide), an eigenfunction just needs to be a homomorphism into $\mathbb{C}$. At least for a group where every element has finite order (maybe some compactness thing would also do here), it then follows that $f$ really just maps to unit norm complex numbers; let's call these homs from $G$ to $S^1$ characters of the group. Then I think there might be some canonical choice of an orthonormal basis consisting of these characters, and this is what we consider the Fourier basis, and the Fourier transformation on a function gives the coeffs of the function in this basis. Maybe this is related to the spectral theorem or something?

Anyway, for an important example, we could take $G$ to be the boolean hypercube $\{-1,1\}^n$, taken as a group that acts on itself by coordinatewise multiplication (i.e., $\left(\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}\right)^n$). What characters do we have — which homomorphisms $G\to S^1$ are there? Well, each element squares to $(1,1,\cdots ,1,1)$ which must map to $1\in \mathbb{C}$, so each $g\in G$ must map to $\pm 1$. Such a map is determined by where the elements of $G$ with just one $-1$ are sent (anything is a product of these) — it follows from this that the characters are precisely the XORs — each character just takes the product of some subset of the coordinates.

More generally, can take $G$ to be $(\mathbb{Z}/k\mathbb{Z})^n$; perhaps its nicest if we take it to be $\{1,\omega,\omega^2\}^n$ with $\omega=e^{2\pi i/3}$. A character then needs to send everything to $\{1,\omega,\omega^2\}\subseteq S^1$, and it is fully given by where it sends the $\omega$ in each coordinate, and any choice gives a character. We then get that there are $3^n$ such characters, one for each way to specify for each coordinate whether it gets raised to the power $0,1$, or $2$ before multiplying everything together. One can check explicitly that this is an orthonormal (given the appropriate normalization in the inner product) basis for the space of functions from $G$ to $\mathbb{C}$. 
## to do
* examine applications of the ordinary fourier transform. see if/why it is just this property of the fourier transform that's needed for the proofs to work. explain why one might come up with this generalization of the ordinary fourier transform!