
This is an attempt to make sense of how mechanistic anomaly detection would work, even with >50% probability when not having been trained against. (As far as I can tell, even if it almost always worked in a zero-shot sense, it'd almost certainly not solve alignment, and also not get us much closer to a solution to alignment, because one wouldn't be able to really do much that is useful if the mechanistic anomaly detection system says that an anomaly has occurred, but this is a separate issue that is not the focus of this textum (:) ).)

These attempts are not representative, at least for now, but these are where I'm at after having ruled out some other stuff.

* So, there's this thing we're explaining, which is low loss on a certain train data set. Now, I take it that the explanation is supposed to be heuristic-formal, which I think should be something like "the input has such and such features, and thus (heuristically-formally), these nodes will be such and such, which causes these other nodes to be such-and-such, which causes the output to be such-and-such, which matches the thing it is supposed to compute (?)"
  some immediate confusions:
  * The loss is supposed to be a formal variable for this to make sense, right? How do I think of it if the loss is just specified in terms of some data labels in a way which isn't that nice? We probably don't want to just explain low loss separately on each data point? I think one option here would be to notice inside the heuristic reasoner that the output has certain values on certain kinds of inputs, but then it seems like we face an isomorphic (?) alignment problem inside the method that the heuristic reasoner uses to compute the outputs! anyway, this (the correct outputs) do not seem formally specified in a nice way, not in a way that we could reason about them in a formal language like we'd want to make this thing purely formal?
* hmm I guess wouldn't the most natural heuristic explanation that fits this shape just be the entirely misaligned one? it seems like the input->output most naturally generated the misaligned model (this is the alignment problem), and now when you have this heuristic explanation, why would it not just learn an explanation "isomorphic" to the misaligned model, and this would be clearly unhelpful? i guess maybe it is helpful if it learns a different misaligned model or something? but in these cases we'd just expect it to break all the time even if it's fine I think? like if by default it learns some different model, then it'd just always flag anomalies on test data. so insofar as it could be useful, it is useless? there might be a much nicer way to state this argument
* not sure what a misaligned "deceptive" heuristic reasoner would do i guess, but seems like it has lots of leverage lol — get it misaligned, we are screwed. seems hard to make it not a general reasoner right if it needs to understand stuff about the real-world task that the other model is doing?
