
st anselm: bro, imagine a thing which has all its properties take on positive values
me: ok i'm not sure what this means but sure let's go with it (i happen to have heard this argument earlier and know this won't be the biggest issue; one could eg try what st anselm said with "imagine the nicest 'logically possible' object" or something). let's say i'm now imagining a thing which has all its properties take on positive values
st anselm: now note that in the 'does it exist? pls ans yes/no' property, existing would be positive.
me: ok sure (well, again with the caveats above). i've now recognized that i should be imagining a thing which exists
st anselm: ha! you just admitted you think that a thing all of whose properties are positive indeed exists!
me: dafuq? yes, i'm holding in my imagination a thing which i'm imagining to exist. this doesn't have anything to do with me taking anything to exist! if earlier, you tried to use your existence-is-a-positive-property line to get me to think that the thing really exists, then sorry, assertions don't (and shouldn't) escape my imagination like that — for example, i can easily imagine being the president of the universe without thinking i'm the president of the universe. how is what you did different from the clearly silly: "surely you can imagine being the president of the universe. ha! now you think you are!"? ok, maybe you wanted me to use some kind of imagining-prime with more power to make assertions than the one i'm assuming. in that case, my guess is that i'll no longer be willing to grant that i can imagine-prime things at will