date: 2023/08/29

This is an introduction to autoregressive transformer models — the kind of model that GPT-n is (for $1\leq n\leq 4$, anyway). Note that whenever I say "transformer" in what follows, I really mean "autoregressive transformer" — for instance, not everything below applies to BERT (a family of transformer models that I think was used to achieve best performance on a bunch of natural language processing benchmarks in like 2018-2020) or the original transformer from Vaswani et al.'s 2017 'Attention is All You Need' (which have slightly different type signatures and computational structures), though understanding autoregressive transformers will make it pretty easy to understand other transformer variants, too. While this piece is self-contained and provides a full^[if you see something I've forgotten, please let me know] mathematical specification of GPT-2, in addition (or instead) of reading this piece, you could also consider reading [Neel Nanda's intro to transformers](https://dynalist.io/d/n2ZWtnoYHrU1s4vnFSAQ519J#z=pndoEIqJ6GPvC1yENQkEfZYR) which provides a bunch more detail.

The prompt that led me to writing this piece was a friend asking me to explain 'in baby terms how a baby transformer works'. So I've intended this introduction to be accessible to a smart reader with a bit of mathematical education — if you can roughly understand the sentence "The model was trained using gradient descent; after, it was used for inference" (or are willing and able to branch off and come to independently understand this kind of thing), I'm guessing you're good to go. 
## The business an autoregressive transformer is in

We'll be looking at sequences of items where each entry comes from a finite set — for instance sequences of digits like $(3,6,9,2,5,8,1,4,7,0,3,6)$, where there are $10$ possible options for each item in the sequence. A transformer is a next-thing-in-a-sequence prediction model, i.e., it takes a sequence of items (usually, of whatever length) as the input and outputs a probability distribution over items and it is trained to make this probability distribution accurately predict the next thing in the sequence on a bunch of training data. For instance, from the data sequence $(3,6,9,2,5,8,1,4,7,0,3,6)$, we can create a training data point $(x,y)$ with input $x = (3,6,9,2,5,8,1,4,7,0,3)$ and label $y = 6$. In most contexts, it will also make sense to create the training data point $x = (3,6,9,2)$ and $y = 5$, and similarly for the remaining $9$ ways to truncate that example sequence.
  
Some technical details: usually one uses negative log-likelihood loss for training, i.e. the sum across all training data points of the negative of the log of the probability assigned to the correct answer, as is common for classifiers. As usual for ML models, the function from sequences to predictions depends on a bunch of parameters (we'll provide some more details on how in a bit), and training a transformer is optimizing these parameters with (a variant of) gradient descent.
  
The most salient use case is predicting what comes next in a piece of text. First, we partition all text into some number — let's say $50257$ (which is the number for GPT-2) — of possible different character strings called tokens.| The |details| of| this| are| relatively| un|important|,| but| per|ad|venture| something| like| this|.| Text prediction then becomes the problem of, given a sequence of things where each thing is one of these 50257 possible things, predicting the next thing in the sequence. One reason to focus on text is that being good really good at text prediction sort of implies one is pretty good at everything. For instance, text on the internet contains a bunch of examples of arithmetic — being good at predicting what comes after an equal sign sort of implies one can do arithmetic.

## The internals of an autoregressive transformer

Now that we've made sense of the telos of a transfomer, let's get to the internals. 
### A transformer as a sheet of tag-laden strands
I'd suggest thinking of a transformer as a sheet of $n$ uniformly spaced vertical strands, with the first strand on the left and the last strand on the right. We'll call each strand a residual stream of the transformer. The number of strands will be the number of items in the input sequence. Each strand will have $2\ell+1$ uniformly spaced blank tags on it, where $\ell$ is an integer called the number of layers. Each of these tags will eventually come to have a vector, called an activation vector, written on it; for GPT-2-small, these vectors will all be in $\mathbb{R}^{768}$. The blank tags will get vectors written on them row by row, from the bottommost row to the topmost. Actually, the vector on a tag will turn out to depend only on data which is simultaneously non-strictly to the left and strictly below the tag, so one could also compute these vectors column by column, from the leftmost column to the rightmost column, as long as one fills each row from the bottom to the top.^[In fact, this order of operations turns out to make a lot of sense in case we are using a language model to generate longer answers than those just consisting of one single next output token, i.e., when after we get a model to predict token $n+1$ in a sequence, we sample a token from that distribution, append that to the input sequence, and run the model again to compute a prediction for token $n+2$, and so on.] While $n$ can be anything, $\ell$ is fixed for a given model — that is, the same transformer model can be run with any number of strands (i.e., an input sequence of any length), but the number of blank tags per strand will always be the same (for a given model) — for instance, for GPT-2-small, $\ell=12$ and $2\ell+1=25$. Or well, the claim that the number of strands can be anything is only almost right: I think one usually both trains and allows inference on transformers only with input sequences up to some finite length, called the context length of the model — for instance, $n\leq 1024$ for GPT-2. (The reason one limits this length during training is that for fixed architectural details, the number of basic operations one turns out to need to do per next item prediction is larger when the input sequence is longer — in fact, the number of extra operations one needs for one more prediction is linear in the length of the sequence.)

### Embedding — translating items into the transformer's vector language
To predict the next item after a given sequence of $n$ items, we start by putting an item from the sequence at the bottom of each strand, from left to right, matching items in our sequence with strands. The first tag on each strand will then get a vector written on it that depends only on the item below the strand and on the index of the strand. The operation of going from items to vectors is called the embedding — we are embedding information about the tokens and their positions as vectors in a vector space. There are a couple reasonable options for how to do the positional part. To provide a canonical example to have in mind, the following is what the embedding operation of GPT-2 does.
1) Each possible item (i.e., token) $t$ gets a corresponding (learned) vector $\mathbf{u_t}$ in $\mathbb{R}^{768}$. (This is a total of $50257\cdot 768\approx 36.8$ million learned parameters.)
2) Each of the $1024$ — recall from earlier that input sequences to GPT-2 have to have length at most $1024$ — possible input sequence indices $i$ gets a corresponding (learned) vector $\mathbf{v_i}$ in $\mathbb{R}^{768}$ as well. (This is another $1024\cdot 768\approx 0.8$ million learned parameters.)
Then, if strand $i$ has item $t$ at the bottom, the vector that gets written on the lowermost tag on that strand is $\mathbf{u_t}+\mathbf{v_i}$.

### Unembedding — translating from the transformer's vector language to predictions

At the top of strand $i$, we are going to get a prediction for token $i+1$ from tokens $1,2,\ldots, i$. If you like, you can think of the strands as being slightly slanted (from vertical) so that the top of strand $i$ is at the same horizontal coordinate as the bottom of string $i+1$ — this way, the prediction for the item at position $i+1$ at the top lines up with the actual item at the bottom. Note that I was lying slightly when I said a transformer maps a sequence of inputs to a single prediction for the next token — while it does do that, it also outputs predictions for what comes after each truncation of the sequence, all at once. So running a transformer on an input sequence of length $n$ really gives $n$ predictions by default. This way, we can compute the model's answers to the $n$ different next item prediction problem instances one can get from a training data sequence of length $n+1$ in one fell swoop. During training, this lets us grade the model on $n$ different prediction problems for each full forward pass of the model, instead of having to run a separate forward pass for each truncation of the sequence. If one were to run a separate forward pass for each truncation, it turns out that the output distributions (and, in fact, every activation vector) would be exactly the same^[ignoring possible issues with some ways to do the positional encoding] as the output distributions (and activation vectors) at the tops of corresponding strands when one does a single forward pass on the full sequence, but the number of operations one would need to do to get as many predictions (on which to base a gradient descent step) would be (some constant times) times the average sequence length times larger. So the fact that one gets a bunch of predictions all at once is quite helpful for training.^[In case we are using a language model to generate longer answers than those just consisting of one single next output token, the fact that a transformer's computation on a longer sequence includes as a subcomputation its computation on any truncation of that sequence is also very helpful during inference. After generating a prediction for token $n+1$, one can predict token $n+2$ by reusing the old activation vectors on strands $1,\ldots,n$, only having to additionally compute what to write on strand $n+1$.]

Let us not describe how the probability distribution at the top of strand $i$ is computed. We will assume that the activation vector $\mathbf{a}$ on the top tag of strand $i$ has already been computed (how this happens is explained in the next section) — think of $\mathbf{a}$ as the answer in the transformer's vector language, which still needs to be translated into a probability distribution for item $i+1$ on the list. That is, we want to go from $\mathbf{a}$ to a probability $p_t$ for each possible item $t$. This probability $p_t$ is computed as follows:
1) For each possible item $t$, there is again a corresponding learned vector $\mathbf{w_t}$. For GPT-2, each $\mathbf{w_t}$ is chosen to be the same as the embedding vector of the corresponding vector, $\mathbf{u_t}$, introduced earlier. But one can also let the $[\text{dimension of the residual stream}]\times [\text{number of possible items}]$ parameters here be new learned parameters. (These are respectively called the unembedding parameters being tied or untied to the embedding parameters.^[I don't know any great justification of tying these parameters (other than it apparently being reasonable empirically), but I guess it's not completely completely unprincipled. The best conceptual justification of tying these weights that I can quickly come up with is the following: for every model with untied embedding and unembedding parameters, there ought to (well, maybe) be a way to transform it into one with tied parameters (though not by literally just changing the unembedding parameters alone) without affecting the computation it does that much — "it shouldn't be that hard to have inputs and outputs be in the same language" — and cutting down on the parameter count without affecting the class of expressible models much is good.])
2) For each possible item $t$, we compute a corresponding real number $y_t=\mathbf{w_t}\cdot \mathbf{a}$, which we call the logit of token $t$. I'm not sure there's a particularly wise thing I can say here to motivate this — maybe that the dot product roughly captures how far along the direction chosen to correspond to a token the activation vector is (though it's not quite that, because $\mathbf{w_t}$ need not have unit norm). 
3) As usual in ML, the logits are mapped to a probability distribution on items by applying a softmax: $p_t = \frac{e^{y_t}}{\sum_{\text{items }s} e^{y_s}}$.

This part is called the unembedding, because we're translating back from the residual stream to a space that talks directly about tokens. 

### How the vectors are computed from layer to layer

We will now specify how the vectors written on tags in row $j$, for $2\leq j \leq 2\ell+1$, are computed iteratively from vectors below them. More precisely, the vector $\mathbf{a_{i,j}}$ on strand $i$ in row $j$ is a sum of the vector on the tag just below it, $\mathbf{a_{i,j-1}}$, plus a certain vector $\mathbf{b_{i,j}}$ that is computed from vectors on strands $i'\leq i$ in row $j-1$. The vector from the tag below contributing to the vector on a tag in this way is called 'the model having a residual connection'. Residual connections are the main motivation for picturing the tags as living on strands (as opposed to just being in a grid, say), as well as the reason why the strands are called 'residual streams'.

How the vector $\mathbf{b_{i,j}}$ is computed depends on the parity of $j$ — that is, it alternates between being computed by a multi-headed attention operation (when $j$ is even), and then by a stream-wise fully-connected operation^[This is canonically called either a feed-forward network/layer/sub-layer or a multi-layer perceptron, but I think these are both tragically bad names. Even though you probably won't gain much understanding of transformers from what I'm about to say now, allow me to evangelize anyway. Saying it's a feed-forward network is confusing because the most common definition of feed-forward is something like 'there are no loopy/recurrent bits, i.e., computation doesn't look like the same map (i.e., with the same parameters) being applied over and over again to some hidden state'; in this sense, saying something is a feed-forward network says very little about it — for instance, a transformer itself is also a feed-forward network. Saying it's a multi-layer perceptron is bad because it is neither really multi-layer — it only has one layer with a nonlinearity — nor a perceptron, nor a multi-layer perceptron according to the definition currently on [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multilayer_perceptron) (well, probably — this last claim is a bit hard to judge given that the Wikipedia definition manages to be slightly self-contradictory).] (when $j$ is odd). I'll explain each in turn

#### Multi-head attention operation
moves information around. 16 attention heads per multi-head attention. 

in each attention head: each position gets a query, key, and value vec. these are determined by learned param linear maps from resid to 64 dim. intuitive picture: query says what kind of info is wanted at a position, key says whether another earlier position has this kind of information, and value is what then actually gets moved (sth like what the value of this kind of info was). 

#### Stream-wise fully-connected operations
resid mapped linearly to 2 times larger dim, through relu activation, then back linearly to resid


### One last thing: LayerNorm

Ok, to finish the explanation, we need to deal with one last lie: whenever I said that something is done on a vector from the residual stream — that is, right before the unembed and before each MLP and before each attention head, it's really done on a certain normalized version of that vector. This normalization
operation is called LayerNorm. 



# mess

Computation proceeds by writing stuff on the tags according to certain rules that depend on the parameters of the model (more on these rules soon). 

Importantly, for a given model, what gets written on a tag is a function only of what's written on tags in the bottom left quadrant compared to it — more precisely, tags which are simultaneously strictly below it and weakly to its left. More precisely, each tag will get a vector — for GPT-2(-small), a vector in $\mathbb{R}^{768}$ — called an activation vector, written on it.

Before we begin playing the usual game of writing something on a tag according to what's written on previous tags to the bottom left, we will do something special to write vectors on the $n$ tags in the bottom-most row. For each possible item, we will have a separate vector that we will always write on the first tag on a strand if that 

(for GPT-2, )

To get the vector written on the bottom-most blank tag on each strand, we do something special — we map each item of the input sequence to a learned vector. That is, for each 

Once we get to the top of a strand, we translate 



I'd suggest thinking of the computation as placing tags on the strings, with a (let's say) 768-dimensional vector, called an activation vector, written on each tag. 

At the top of each strand, we're going to get a prediction for the next token. If you like, it might be slightly nicer to think of the strands as being slightly slanted so that the top of string $i$ is on the same vertical as the bottom of string $i+1$ — this way, the prediction for an item at the top lines up with the same item at the bottom. Note that I was lying slightly when I said a transformer maps a sequence of inputs to a single prediction for the next token — while it does that, it also outputs predictions for what comes after each truncation of the sequence. So running a transformer on an input sequence of length $n$ really gives $n$ predictions by default. This way, we can compute (and grade the model on) the $n$ different next-item prediction problem instances one can get from a training data sequence of length $n+1$ can be 



The same transformer can be run with any number of strings^[]. 

, so the number of strings is the number of tokens in our input sequence

each with $\ell$ beads on it. To do inference, we put a token at the bottom of each string, we put a token, so the number of strings is the number of tokens in our sequence


