meta: this should maybe be split into 'thought reifies' and 'thought relates'
thought seeks to talk about things. it is very useful to 'make things up'. once you've made a thing up, make 'something' into a thing, it becomes much easier start to talk about it. you can now relate it to other things, talk about its properties. you can now use it to make more things.



examples:
* random variables, instead of distributions. can add random variables. a random graph becomes connected at $p=\frac{\log n}{n}$ (reference: https://www.math.cmu.edu/~af1p/MAA2005/L2.pdf)
* can add and multiply functions (pointwise). then can consider maps of functions to functions, like the multiplication by 2 or the derivative. to get there, it helps to have first viewed all the functions together as an object (a vector space, let's say), because we want to say that the operator is a map from this space to itself. we can then consider the operators themselves together as making up another vector space, and so on. 
* Imagine/consider a cube. You can obviously 'see' it clearly in some sense; maybe you even know you can make it precise as $[-1,1]^3\subseteq \mathbb{R}^3$. Even then, there's another sense in which you don't see it clearly at all: there are many properties of the cube . For example, suppose you hang the cube up from one vertex, and then cut it into horizontal slices. What kinds of slices does your stack end up having? (h/t Andrew Gritsevskiy and Arjun Panickssery) What if you instead take a random orientation, and consider just the slice which contains the origin? (Maybe a better question: what if you do this for a high-dimensional cube? hint: Poke a rod through the cube in a random direction, passing through the origin. What can you say about the length of the part of the rod which is inside the cube?) In fact, you might not even know how the cube 'relates to itself': can you describe the symmetry group of the cube? let's say we just mean those you can do on a physical solid cube, ie those whose matrices have det 1. It turns out to be isomorphic to $S_4$, the group of permutations on $4$ elements. Can you make it explicit/obvious that it is $S_4$? (this example is from Office Hours with a Geometric Group Theorist by Matt Clay & Dan Margalit (and others))
* there is a mostly silly sense in which all of math can be made out to be about various contraptions built of the empty set. if i were a continental philosopher, i would at this point go on at length about how one starts by making nothingness a thing, and how now there's at least one thing, and how we can then consider a collection that just has this one thing, and how we can then consider a collection that has this collection (this path will eventually lead to the zermelo natural numbers) or consider a collection that has this collection and also the earlier nothingness-thing (this path will eventually lead to the von neumann natural numbers), and maybe also say something more crazy involving hegel, but let me not do any (more) of this now.  
* you make the notions of the position and momentum of a point particle. now you can view their values together as a point in phase space describing/specifying the point particle at a particular time. now you can talk about the flow on phase space given by running time forward. now you can eg prove that this flow preserves volume: https://www.damtp.cam.ac.uk/user/tong/dynamics/dynhtml/S4.html#:~:text=Liouville's%20Theorem%3A%20Consider%20a%20region,the%20volume%20remains%20the%20same.
* you have a permutation that you are interested in seeing more clearly. putting it in the context of a permutation group can help you see it as a product of transpositions, say. 'going outward' can help one go back inward (thanks clem von sten for a related discussion)
* you analogize some things (for example, a person is in many ways analogous to humanity as a whole (the weltgeist)), perhaps initially not-very-consciously, not taking the analogy itself as an object of interest (or as a thing at all). then you notice that analogy as a general thing, and can begin to critique it: can begin to point at ways in which these things are disanalogous, can start to point at domains in which the analogy is more appropriate or less appropriate