
note that the ring Z mod pZ (for p prime, which we're assuming) is in fact the field F_p. so it would suffice to show that the multiplicative group of any finite field is cyclic — let's show that! say the field has k nonzero elements (so k=p-1 for Z/pZ)

each elt x has order dividing k. for d|k, if there is any elt of order d, consider the subgroup generated by it. this must have order d. also note each thing in it solves x^d-1 = 0. since we have a field, this poly only has at most d zeros, so there must not be any other elt of order d left outside this subgroup (since we already found d roots). this subgroup is cyclic of order d, so it has euler's totient function phi(d) many elts of order d. so the whole group has phi(d) elts of order d in this case. so we see that there are either 0 or phi(d) elts of order d for each d|k. note further that sum_{d|k} phi(d) = k because one can see the LHS as counting the numbers up to $k$ according to their gcd with $k$ (the term phi(d) counts those with gcd k/d). so if we had 0 of some order d, then we wouldn't make it to k in total! so there must be precisely phi(d) of each order d. in particular, there are phi(k) of order k, and since that's not 0, there must be an elt of order k. but this means the group is cyclic as we wanted to show!

(this argument is from https://math.stackexchange.com/a/837854/540174 )


# mess

let d divide k and consider the polynomial x^d - 1. note it has at most d distinct roots (because it has degree d). how many elts are there of each order? for each d|k, naively we could have all d solutions to x^d - 1 have order d, but actually also all elements of order s|d will be counted here, so the number of elts of order d is at most

d-sum_{s|d}num of elts of order s

