
ethical criticism/revision/reanalysis as an expansion of our moral circle to include other legitimate continuations of past values (?)

a cluster of thoughts motivated by a talk by Scott Garrabrant at ILIAD:
* a perhaps perennial worry: what if our values get continued incorrectly? what if this leads to a future with little of value?
	* this statement with sth close to my values plugged in: what if the fire of the enlightenment goes out?
	* related worry: what if tradition X is no longer practiced? what if the ideals of the founding fathers are no longer upheld?
	* this seems related to: can't we imagine small changes in history which would have plausibly led to presents we'd see as vastly less valuable than the present we're actually in?
* an attempt at addressing this worry: maybe we should make sure that all past ethical advances were in some sense compelled by our previous ethics, not contingent changes. we should revisit things that appear more contingent. this provides further ethical reason to subject everything in ethics to criticism
* another attempt at addressing this worry: we should somehow make sure that any future force shaping the universe (such as perhaps AGI) will look at its 'past forms' for ethical guidance, and we should make it so that it considers us as among its past forms. more precisely, it should maybe maintain a portfolio of all possible continuations of past forms and make sure that all of them are represented (at least up to us-now into its past)
* the above two points seem very similar. maybe the best way to get the latter involves also including all the continuations of forms which came before us in this field of care. and us ourselves caring about these could-have-beens might centrally involve revisiting past contingencies in the way described above
* this feels very related to updatelessness. perhaps the decision to care about our could-have-beens now could be a consequence of the policy we'd have chosen in a primordial state having this property
* one thing that makes it look like there is a lot to be gained from getting the above right: we like to imagine moral dilemmas where there's some really tough all-or-nothing tradeoff between two things: theory A says option 1 is great and option 2 is shit; theory B says the opposite; now decide. but really, 'pareto is the final frontier' (quote from osman+rio). it's mostly the case that there are options which are not-best-but-great according to the two theories. splitting the lightcone $1000$-ways between $1000$ orthogonal value-systems might plausibly be like $500\times$ better according to each than giving the entire lightcone to one of them at random. from the pov of each of the theories, there is much to be gained from replacing a random choice with a respect-for-all
	* wait, doesn't this mean that wise theories themselves would also already want to somehow cooperate across the multiverse to split stuff everywhere, and plausibly manage to do so? or maybe this concavity thing doesn't actually seem that compelling anymore if one stops believing in a single universe? also, surely you wouldn't cooperate with arbitrary theories, because that seems sorta confusing/not-well-defined/bad (eg for each theory in this collection, the collection might also contain its anti-theory)
* maybe this caring-about-all-continuations is a leading reason of our (legitimate) moving toward thinking that it's great for there to be all kinds of different things going on
* where does this expansion of the moral circle into hypotheticals stop? does it continue ever further into the past and into less contingent matters? how do the weights get determined?
* this thing about contingent ethical choices having been made in the past sort of semi-assumes a silly picture of value formation, seeing it as a process where we start from some minimal primordial ethical state and lock in further properties, sometimes contingently, sometimes being reason-compelled. i think we can still basically say the above without semi-assuming such a picture though