
The goal of our group is to do research which contributes to solving AI alignment.[^1] Broadly, we of course aim to work on whatever technical alignment projects have the highest expected value. Our current best ideas for research directions to pursue seem to be in interpretability, though we make an effort to keep our eyes on the ball by also regularly thinking about MIRI-style agent foundations.
An angle of attack in interpretability that seems promising to is that of understanding the natural units in terms of which a neural net is performing its computation; that is, developing methods to find the concepts in terms of which a particular neural net thinks; specifically, we would like to be able to look at the activations of a neural net on a particular input and tell which concepts 'are active'. This includes developing a conceptual framework for even making sense of all this, as well as developing experiments to resolve uncertainties about fundamentals of the theory under construction. Here are three such key uncertainties that we aim to address in our current research:
1) linearity of representations
2) Are there few features, or are there many?
3) What's the geometry and combinatorics of features? For instance, (when) are compositional features orthogonal to each other? 
We see figuring this out as being helpful as a building block towards the ambitious interpretability goal of completely reverse-engineering a neural net (https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/mech-interp-essay/index.html), but also as a step to check whether a model is thinking about problematic things, which could ideally be ablated or otherwise edited out (though we are aware this could be difficult).
Our current main focus is somewhat more agnostic towards each of the above theoretical questions, and also a bit less ambitious and a bit less risky. Our current main projects aim to find individual meaningful directions in activation space. The hope is that, even when unsupervised, this can be much more tractable than finding all the features, both because we can leverage details about particular features when doing this (for instance, constraints those particular features satisfy), and also because we need to make fewer contentious assumptions like the ones from the previous item. In particular
1) Provide technical improvements to CCS for finding truth.
2) Figuring out whether CCS is measuring truth.
3) Combining CCS with model editing
4) Looking for other concepts along similar lines
Finally, we would like to more generally understand LM cognition. Here are some main questions we would like to answer:
1) To what extent are transformers ensembles of shallow circuits, and is being an ensemble of shallow circuits in tension with transformers having the sort of general cognition we should be worried about? (To what extend are humans ensembles of shallow circuits?)
2) Can we make sense of a single circuit passing information through the residual stream back to its own components (as distinct from the model simply employing two separate circuits for the two predictions)? Is RLHF needed for interesting examples of this to occur?
3) Are there examples of the 'same plan' being used to predict multiple tokens in sequence? Is RLHF needed for interesting examples of this to occur? For instance, do we ever see something like the model computing the rhyme pattern for a poem at token 3 layer 5, which is then referenced for all further tokens in the poem (at layer 6 in the respective token stack, let us say)
To study this, we would like to combine conceptual work that aims to clarify these questions with experiments that aim to test these: both in model psychology, including model developmental psychology, (that is, behavioral experiments) as well as in model neuroscience (that is, probing and other interpretability techniques). Especially for the last research direction, but really for all of our research, we see ourselves as being subject to an important imperative not to publish sociohazardous research. In other words, we only intend to publish research that contributes more to alignment than to capabilities.

[^1]: This is because we want the future to be awesome, and, you know, creating a misaligned system more intelligent than all of us (and our aligned systems) combined (and plausibly losing control to it) is antithetical to awesomeness!
