
We would like the world (including ourselves) to be like this; we would like the world (including ourselves) not to be like that.[^1] Some of us would like there to be cool structures, some of us would like people to be happier or more fulfilled or to lead more interesting lives or to solve more math problems, (some of us would like there to be more such people,) some of us would like themselves to be happier or more fulfilled or well-liked or high-status or to lead more interesting lives, some of us would like to get this or that job, attend this or that school, go on vacation with their family or friends to this or that place, some of us would like to write the next great American novel, some of us would like political systems or other people to be more just or kind or honest or compassionate, some of us would like ourselves to be more just or kind of honest or compassionate, or more attuned to the needs of each situation, some of us would like to act in accordance with reason and with the moral law within; some of us would like there not to be death, disease, hunger, sadness, depression, and suffering in general, etc.. In short, we would rather have things (in a broad sense) be in some ways, and not in others.

(I don't want to say that there is some unproblematic, concrete, sense, prior to us starting to make sense of the world, in which we would like these things. For instance, we might have an incredibly difficult time specifying any of these wishes in a low-level language for talking about mathematical/physical/biological/mental/social processes. It is plausible that a better description of things is that we start from some highly confused state, with some initial driving forces acting on us, and we make more sense of what we'd like the world to be like as we go. Feel free to think of the previous paragraph as really talking about these initial driving forces. Or, if you think it is even silly to think of a pretheoretical baby/embryo-being as having meaningful driving forces at all, then feel free to think of the paragraph as talking of the motive/reasoning forces in their current state, i.e., as they are currently in you (presumably after a great deal of reflection already!) — after all, what perhaps matters most here is that we make sense of why one should care about philosophy, not about why some primordial being should. Other than likings, many other notions in the present story/argument are also definitely similarly vague — precise versions remain to be provided (well, with some probability that the concepts cannot be rescued and out to be abandoned).

To have things be in some ways, and not in others, we try to make them be so. To do this, we need to solve problems. To solve problems, we need to understand stuff better; we need to create concepts in terms of which we can reason well — more precisely, perhaps we want to use a small amount of reasoning to reach a bunch of correct conclusions. We want to make it easy for ourselves to figure things out, so we can figure things out. We need good reasoning-components, good 

[^1]: Let me say this without making a claim about this liking itself being all there is to ethics — indeed, I doubt it is!
