
eg integral, relatedly eg length of curve and area, eg scheme probably, eg homology, eg natural numbers lol

these have mess defns but working with them looks more like proving a few properties (often obv from def) and then doing a lot of stuff where we use these properties without using the defn; what’s going on here? probably in most such cases these are the unique things satisfying these properties? eg there are indeed axioms for homology (see hatcher), probably riemann/lebesgue integral (or expexted value) satisfies some unique property, etc probably. still wtf tho?

maybe also:
* truth
	* in a sense (namely, tarski's) truth cannot be defined at all, but one can obviously work with truth. one just says it satisfies some properties (like, that each sentence is true xor false, that negation takes a truth to a falsehood and vice versa, that modus ponens takes two truths to a truth, etc), and then gets cooking
	* relatedly: there's nothing that could be called a truth algorithm. there's not even a provability vs disprovability checker algorithm (that also haltingly does something on independents). in a kolmogorov sense maybe truth and provability wouldn't be considered simple properties at all! but there is obviously a sense in which they are simple!
* probability. we struggle to say what it is, but we can very fruitfully work using it anyway. we act coherently with it!

maybe also many real-world devices/technologies are like this. they have some surface at which they are easy to use, but their construction can be complicated! eg phones (strictly as devices for calling i mean): to use one, you just need to know that each device has a number and you can ask to connect to it by typing that number into another device, but there's a lot of stuff that goes into constructing these devices and infrastructure to make this work. seems a lot like how integration can be skillfully used by someone that wouldn't know how to construct/[properly define] it. maybe a difference is that in the mental case, you can just learn some rules that fully capture the thing (like the axioms of homology) without otherwise having to even construct anything (though someone should construct it also probably to make sure everything makes sense), like i'm saying that you are free to think of this thing as just something satisfying certain rules and this lets you get very far with it, like i'm saying there needn't be some complicated construction in your head to operate the device, but for phones you do actually need the complicated construction to be in place, you need to be interacting with something actually complicated. though still, it's similar in that you still don't need to understand the construction to operate with the device skillfully