
you have a bunch of input-output pairs. you have the usual prior on all programs. solomonoff function induction := you think of the input-output pairs as being generated by picking a random program from this prior and generating using it, and so you update on seen pairs as you should (when predicting future pairs and i guess also when saying what the function is)



a msg to lucius about this:


For solomonoff induction type things, it's generally nice to have the following kind of theorem.
Thm 1 (template). For a given class C of predictors, each predictor P in C loses to "the solomonoff inductor for C". That is: on any data distribution, that solomonoff inductor does worse than P in log loss by at most a constant (depending on $P$ but not the distribution).

For solomonoff function induction, I think there are some subtleties with getting this sort of result. The point of this note is to discuss that. If anything is unclear, I'm happy to try to explain better. (There are a few things here that I haven't thought through completely carefully, so there's also some chance I'm wrong about a few things.)

So, as before, we're in the setting where you have input-output pairs from a function f: X->Y revealed, and your job is to predict outputs on new inputs.

I think a Thm 1 type statement is easy to prove if we take C to be the set of all predictors P given by turing machines that get to see an input x and have to compute a probability distribution on Y — i.e., those P that can be specified as follows:
* Specify a turing machine T; on a given input x in X and output y in Y, it is supposed to output a positive rational number (well, we assume some reasonable way to represent positive rationals as bitstrings has been specified, and this is how we interpret its output) and these rationals must sum up to $1$.
Actually, we can prove Claim 1 for \emph{computably samplable} predictors — i.e, predictors specified implicitly in the form of a computable sampler as follows:
* Specify a probabilistic turing machine T that gets an input x as its input and outputs some output y in Y.
	* It's even fine to allow T which don't always halt here; we think of those as implicitly giving a measure summing to less than $1$ (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sub-probability_measure).

If a probability distribution is computable (in the first sense above), then one can computably sample from it. Thus, if we show that any computably samplable predictor loses to solomonoff function induction, then we've also shown that any computable distribution loses to it. And any computably samplable predictor indeed loses to (the universal semimeasure version) of solomonoff function induction basically because of Claim 1 from earlier (a small technicality here: one should use different bits of randomness from the universal semimeasure's infinite read tape for sampling on different inputs; one can do this using dovetailing). So we get a version of Thm 1.

This version of Thm 1 feels a bit unsatisfying to me, because arguably the most natural relevant class of computable predictors to compare solomonoff function induction against is not the one considered above — it is arguably more natural to let a predictor see the observed input-output data set so far when making each successive prediction. Unfortunately, if the order in which input-output pairs are revealed can have an arbitrary distribution (and especially if there can be a correlation between this order and the function), then I think Thm 1 style statements are just false. Vaguely this is because: there are computable predictions which make use of information about which x's had their outputs revealed previously to make predictions, which isn't something solomonoff function induction can natively do, and one can construct data sequences where access to previous input information lets you do really well but on which solomonoff function induction struggles to do well. Concretely, let $x_1, x_2, \ldots$ be a deterministic sequence of increasingly long random strings, and make a function which has input-output pairs $(x_1,0),(x_2,x_1),(x_3,x_2),(x_4,x_3),\ldots$, and make the data set reveal them in precisely that order. Then we have the following very simple computable predictor that gets $0$ loss: predict $0$ initially, and then predict whichever string appears in the data set as an input but not as an output. However, I'm pretty sure Solomonoff induction gets unbounded loss on this sequence. I don't actually have a proof of this latter claim, but I have another slightly more complicated construction for which I can prove that there is a simple computable predictor that gets 0 loss but solomonoff must get unbounded loss. (I can provide this other example if there is interest.)

I think we've learned from the above that there can't be a version of Thm 1 which picks a constant first and then quantifies universally over [distributions on the sequence of revealed inputs], and in fact that there are even particular reveal input sequence distributions $\Delta$ such that there can't be a version of Thm 1 even with $\Delta$ fixed as the reveal sequence distribution. One could hope that there would at least be a version for simple reveal sequence distributions, but I think this will also fail if the data-generating process is allowed to have the reveal sequence choice provide information about the function — actually, one can just use the random string example above, except now putting the randomization inside the reveal sequence distribution, and letting the function depend on the chosen reveal sequence as stated above. However, we can get a version of Thm 1 in case the data-generating process is such that the reveal sequence distribution is simple to sample from conditional on any particular choice of function $f$:
> Thm 1. Let C be the set of computable samplers which get to see the revealed input-output data set so far when sampling the output on the next input (we take these samplers to implicitly specify predictors, as before). Suppose the data-generating process samples a function $f\colon X\to Y$ and then reveals a sequence of input-output pairs, with the sequence of inputs sampled from a distribution $\Delta$. Then each predictor P in C can only beat solomonoff function induction in expected log loss by at most the complexity $C_\Delta$ of sampling from the reveal sequence distribution $\Delta$ plus a constant $C_P$ (depending on the predictor but not the data-generating process).

Pf sketch: Inside solomonoff function induction, one has a probabilistic turing machine that "internally simulates" sampling a first input $x_1$ using $\Delta$, then sampling an output $y_1$ on $x_1$ using $P$, then sampling a second input $x_2$ using $\Delta$ (which can take into account $(x_1,y_1)$), then sampling an output $y_2$ on $x_2$ using $P$ (which can take into account $(x_1,y_1)$ and $x_2$), and so on, until it happens to sample the current input $x$, samples an output $y$ for it, at which point it outputs that. One can analyze the difference between this "internally simulated sampling from $\Delta$ and P" and what $P$ is actually doing as it predicts outputs of $f$ on inputs from $\Delta$, and conclude that the expected log loss of the former is at most the expected log loss of the latter. (Sketch: use linearity of expectation to reduce it to proving a bound for the expected log loss at each input $x$, and then use jensen's inequality to say that averaging your predictions before calculating loss beats averaging your losses (noting that the internal simulator is indeed averaging predictions over all possible paths to the input $x$).)

## added later
* could also prove equivalence of universal semimeasure and kolmogorov versions? if they are in fact equivalent
* solomonoff function induction doesn't work that well when there is a simple property distinguishing test from train — in that case we can just have an if statement checking the property followed by output 0 if it is in the test setting (vs do some legit thing in the train setting), for some small const extra program length. this sorta makes me sad about various concrete proposals for the riemann hypothesis proof problem, because there will be a simple property distinguishing test from train if you want to do task decomposition
	* can we show something like: if there isn't a simple property distinguishing test from train, then solomonoff function induction works well? hmm i guess there's this issue: you don't just have counterexamples with simple properties, but also properties which are simple given a program that does well on train, which could be complicated (eg if this internal variable is set 0, then the if statement triggers, with a choice of variable such that it never triggers in train and also the variable is high complexity to calculate). we could maybe prove that it works well if there isn't a simple distinguishing property given such a program, but maybe that's less interesting?
* can thm 1 be improved to a version that talks about the algorithmic mutual information of $\Delta$ and $f$ instead of the complexity of $\Delta$?


# prev version of msg


For solomonoff induction type things, it's generally nice to have the following kind of theorem.
Thm 1 (template). For a given class C of predictors, each predictor P in C loses to "the solomonoff inductor for C". That is: on any data distribution, that solomonoff inductor does worse than P in log loss by at most a constant (depending on $P$ but not the distribution).

For solomonoff function induction, I think there are some subtleties with getting this sort of result. The point of this note is to discuss that.

I think the statement is easy to prove if we take C to be the set of all predictors P given by turing machines that get to see an input x and have to compute a probability distribution on Y — i.e., those P that can be specified as follows:
* Specify a turing machine T; on a given input x in X and output y in Y, it is supposed to output a positive rational number (well, we assume some reasonable way to represent positive rationals as bitstrings has been specified, and this is how we interpret its output) and these rationals must sum up to $1$.
Actually, we can prove Claim 1 for \emph{computably samplable} predictors — i.e, predictors specified implicitly in the form of a computable sampler as follows:
* Specify a probabilistic turing machine T that gets an input x as its input and outputs some output y in Y.
	* It's even fine to allow T which don't always halt here; we think of those as implicitly giving a measure summing to less than $1$ (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sub-probability_measure).

If a probability distribution is computable (in the first sense above), then one can computably sample from it. Thus, if we show that any computably samplable predictor loses to solomonoff function induction, then we've also shown that any computable distribution loses to it. And any computably samplable predictor indeed loses to (the universal semimeasure version) of solomonoff function induction basically because of Claim 1 from earlier (a small technicality here: one should use different bits of randomness from the universal semimeasure's infinite read tape for sampling on different inputs; one can do this using dovetailing). So we get a version of Thm 1.

This version of Thm 1 feels a bit unsatisfying to me, because arguably the most natural relevant class of computable predictors to compare solomonoff function induction against is not the one considered above — it is arguably more natural to let a predictor see the observed input-output data set so far when making each successive prediction. Unfortunately, if the order in which input-output pairs are revealed can have an arbitrary distribution (and especially if there can be a correlation between this order and the function), then I think Thm 1 style statements are just false. Vaguely this is because: there are computable predictions which make use of information about which x's had their outputs revealed previously to make predictions, which isn't something solomonoff function induction can natively do, and one can construct data sequences where access to previous input information lets you do really well but on which solomonoff function induction struggles to do well. Concretely, let $x_1, x_2, \ldots$ be a deterministic sequence of increasingly long random strings, and make a function which has input-output pairs $(x_1,0),(x_2,x_1),(x_3,x_2),(x_4,x_3),\ldots$, and make the data set reveal them in precisely that order. Then we have the following very simple computable predictor that gets $0$ loss: predict $0$ initially, and then predict whichever string appears in the data set as an input but not as an output. However, I'm pretty sure Solomonoff induction gets unbounded loss on this sequence. I don't actually have a proof of this latter claim, but I have another slightly more complicated construction for which I can prove that there is a simple computable predictor that gets 0 loss but solomonoff must get unbounded loss. (I can provide this other example if there is interest.)

I think we've learned from the above that there can't be a version of Thm 1 which picks a constant first and then quantifies universally over reveal order distributions, and in fact that there are even particular reveal order distributions $\Delta$ such that there can't be a version of Thm 1 even with $\Delta$ fixed as the reveal order distribution. One could hope that there would at least be a version for simple reveal order distributions, but I think this will also fail if the data-generating process is allowed to have the reveal order choice reveal information about the function — actually, one can just use the random string example above, except now putting the randomization inside the reveal order distribution, and letting the function depend on the chosen reveal sequence as stated above. However, we can get a version of Thm 1 in case the data-generating process is such that the reveal order distribution is easy to sample from conditional on any particular choice of function $f$:
> Thm 1. Let C be the set of computable samplers which get to see the revealed input-output data set so far when sampling the output on the next input (we take these samplers to implicitly specify predictors, as before). Suppose the data-generating process samples a function $f\colon X\to Y$ and then reveals a sequence of input-output pairs, with the sequence of inputs sampled from a distribution $\Delta$. Then each predictor P in C can only beat solomonoff function induction in expected log loss by at most the complexity $C_\Delta$ of sampling from the reveal order distribution $\Delta$ plus a constant $C_P$ (depending on the predictor but not the data-generating process).

Pf sketch: Inside solomonoff function induction, one has a probabilistic turing machine that "internally simulates" sampling a first input $x_1$ using $\Delta$, then sampling an output $y_1$ on $x_1$ using $P$, then sampling a second input $x_2$ using $\Delta$ (which can take into account $(x_1,y_1)$), then sampling an output $y_2$ on $x_2$ using $P$ (which can take into account $(x_1,y_1)$ and $x_2$), and so on until it happens to sample the current input $x$, samples an output $y$ for it, and outputs that. One can analyze the difference between this "internally simulated sampling from $\Delta$ and P" and what $P$ is actually doing as it predicts outputs of $f$ on inputs from $\Delta$, and conclude that the expected log loss of the former is at most the expected log loss of the latter. (One can use linearity of expectation to reduce it to proving a bound for the expected log loss gotten at each input $x$, and one can then use jensen's inequality to say that averaging your predictions before calculating loss beats averaging your losses (noting that the internal simulator is indeed averaging predictions over all possible paths to the input $x$).)








# cleaner construction

you give 0 to everything except one string you've skipped among all strings of a certain length (repeat for each length). the predictor that sees the data set can easily tell which one it is and give that 1. but solomonoff has nothing inside doing that — if it had, we could compress these incompressible strings!



# mess 4

* in the latter case, there are a countable number of different cases (depending on which where $P$ gives some predictive distribution 

For any function $f$, the expected log loss of the distribution implicitly given by this sampler is at most the expected log loss of $P$.

This part of the universal semimeasure has complexity about $C_\Delta+C_P$, so it has prior about $2^{C_\Delta+C_P}$, so Claim 1 from earlier tells us that 



# mess 3

For a concrete example, let $x_1$ be a random 

110101010001101 -> 01101

10001010100000 -> 110101010001101

(x_{i+1},x_i) pairs

get arb incr seq x_i

It'd be quite natural to consider computable predictors which can see the train data set when predicting. However, this 

Indeed, then Claim 1 from earlier just gives this desired theorem. You can also 

But arguably, there is a more natural class  

of computable predictors which can look at the entire data set so far. is there a natural theorem against this class?

if one can arbitrarily pick a probability distribution for the order in which to reveal data, then i think the statement of interest is just false, because there is a computable predictor that beats solomonoff arbitrarily much in log loss on a certain deterministic ordering 

but: if there is a computable sampler from the distribution, then i think there is that theorem? because then inside solomonoff function induction one finds guys that work like: sample order, compute outputs on prev, compute outputs on next using those outputs


# mess 2

after some thought: i don't think there can be? there are counterexamples to various attempts. the basic issue is that you can give away info in inputs that can be used by computable predictors which get to see the previous data, but can't be used by solomonoff. eg you pick some hard-to-compute sequence n_i, and you make input-output pairs (n_{i+1}, n_i), shown in order starting from n_2, n_1. then seeing the previous pair lets you guess next outputs easily, and i think solomonoff can't compete with that — i think you can just keep losing as solomonoff if we pick the sequence st it keeps being hard to compute even if you've already paid the previous cost? 

we could get a thm i guess if we force the reveal distribution to be easy to compute. then solomonoff has a guy inside that computes the reveal distribution and simulates the computable predictor on it? (i guess one could have some computability issue with )



# mess

there is also this genre of theorem that one could want to prove about solomonoff induction type things (it's related to stuff in your doc but :
Thm. For any class C of predictors, there is no better predictor in that class than "the solomonoff inductor for that class". That is: on any data distribution, solomonoff does worse in log loss by at most a constant.

for vanilla solomonoff induction, the relevant class is: all computable programs
solomonoff function induction, i think one 

it could be interesting to ask whether solomonoff function induction has all the main nice properties that vanilla solomonoff induction has. tl;dr: yes, with one subtlety

properties:
1) if the data is computably generated, then log loss is bounded by complexity
2) log loss only depends on the programming language up to at most a global constant
3) a computable 

1 and 2 are obvious i think. 3 is false?