
Here is a caricatured version of a view I used to hold: "in mathematics, concepts are mostly just sort of annoying silly things people introduce — their primary effect on my enjoyment of math is to make the nice ideas in proofs involving concepts I'm not familiar with harder to appreciate". In particular, when I'd encounter a problem in a textbook which uses a concept that's new to me, I'd scroll up to the definition of the concept, translate the problem statement into plain mathematical language using that definition, and try to solve that problem, trying to forget about the concept. I now think this was misguided.

Now, it is obvious that concepts are useful for getting to places — for proving things. (This, I doubt I ever doubted.) In fact, concepts can be thought of in large part as carrying information in associated lemmas which compress certain repeating steps in proofs. To give a random example: one reason the concept of a principal ideal domain is useful is that once one shows a certain ring is a PID, one gets a shortcut to  

But, past me asks, why are concepts any fun? Well, even if they aren't 'in themselves' (assuming this even makes sense) , they're instrumental to having all kinds of fun that is inaccessible otherwise, at least if one appreciates understanding others' interesting ideas — in mathematics, these are often stated in terms of these concepts. It is unclear if there is a possible version of mathematics that is not like that, perhaps built by a set of people that find plainer things cool

In fact, there are a bunch of concepts with messy definitions (in fact, occasionally a few different messy ones), where somehow the object ends up being really nice (i.e., has really nice properties, connects nicely with other things one cares about). Defining quotients in terms of cosets is one example. Another example is constructing the natural numbers and defining addition on them in set theory. Another example is defining cohomology. For some of these, the object is really constructed to have a certain property that defines it — it is the unique object with a certain nice property. I guess this is less standardly thought of as a universal property definition, but one can maybe also think of the natural numbers as being the unique object that satisfies the Peano axioms? There's probably some model theory statement like this with second-order logic or some shit (it is certainly strictly speaking false given just first-order PA because it has models of arbitrary infinite cardinality). Anyway, maybe this universal property thing can help one make some sense of objects which end up having really nice properties while having really shit explicit constructions/definitions?

(does this solve this entirely? for one, I guess it's still unclear why there would be objects with these nice properties in the first place, but that seems like a more tractable problem. how do we quantify this? ie how do we concretely think about what we'd expect on priors? maybe there are reasonably many such cases in some sense? maybe math is just all about finding these, and yes sure there's sometimes such things? hmmmm... also note that given universal properties are legit definitions (there might just a priori not be any objects satisfying these), there are in fact short definitions of all of these, so it is strictly speaking false that one only has a long def of an object which has nice properties. hmm hmm hmm)

I guess it is also cool that universal properties make our explicit math more similar to the way one plausibly thinks about math informally — one has objects which do certain things, certain moves one can make. For a bunch of objects, these universal property / unique model definitions capture what moves these are used to make, I think? 