
in any given context where you want to reason through something — say, design an airplane component with some functionality or guess which places your friend would be most interested in traveling to — only a patch of your understanding becomes active = only a patch will be employed. also, you can notice that your understanding is lacking, at which point you tend to refactor some aspects of that patch, not other patches. this imo correct picture is somewhere between the view of logical positivism, where every individual scientific claim is supposed to correspond to a single observation, and the view of (undifferentiated) holism, where science only interacts with observations as a whole. here, each situation instead invokes some small subset of your understanding / your concepts / your mental mechanisms. in other words, the bipartite graph connecting situations to the concepts they invoke is sparse.

i think this is pretty clear for your explicit understanding — in any given 'small' situation, the concepts you could notice yourself thinking in terms of are only a small subset of all of your concepts. it is less clear to me if this is true also for more inexplicit stuff.

i guess maybe there are some mental mechanisms which are invoked almost always? maybe high-level things like stuff having to do with planning well? it seems like some high-level aspects of our reasoning are very similar in all kinds of contexts? it is unclear to me to which extent this is best thought of as invoking the same mental mechanism in various contexts vs there being some fixed scaffolding vs the same kind of high-level thing emerging out of any decent combining of low-level elements, with the actual elements combined being potentially entirely disjoint

(if you spend some time reasoning in a situation and are worried you are missing something, you can and do choose to increase the patch of your understanding that is invoked — you think through more connected things. sometimes this makes you find a more suitable patch to invoke. i guess you then create some new associations which make you more likely to employ this other patch of concepts later.)

stuff is also potentially complicated by it being unclear how to think about contexts/situations as things which 'exist in the world' vs 'exist in our perception' (perhaps we have a classifier, but the classifier also creates situations-in-the-world, but also these are far from being completely arbitrary). more concretely, one unfortunate thing about this picture is that it makes it seem like there is some separate mechanism which classifies a situation, and then reasoning gets started. but really these things should be more similar to each other i think, or sorta the same thing. some mental elements get triggered, these trigger other mental elements, some reasoning happens in terms of the concepts called forth. 