
kaarel: Suppose that from now on your brain is periodically reset to its current state with period T — i.e., you have [memory loss]/[a learning disability] (but you can write notes/papers/textbooks/questions/advice for yourself to look at later). How large does T need to be for it to be possible for you to make meaningful philosophical progress on some question (in a non-galactic amount of time)? How large does T need to be for you to prove the riemann hypothesis (in a non-galactic amount of time)?    
   
kaarel: This relates to understanding what we’d need to do to build an AI that can do research via human prediction/imitation. Slightly more concretely, it relates to whether pretrained gpt-k with large k could be used to get any meaningful research done.  
   
rio: I actually think T wouldn't have to be that high? Or at least since I can explain things well to myself (since I know what questions I'm likely to have) relearning would be very quick from my own notes, and I think in many ways I kinda approach projects as if this were really true of me. Like, I outline really carefully and collate materials for each little bit, then do each bit one by one? I think maybe a bigger limitation is on coming up with new problems (rather than solving ones I already have) since that kinda takes a sort of bathing in my own thoughts in a way that requires them to interact across time.    
   
kaarel: What about a version of you that like never learned what the integers are (so, a fortiori, never learned to do stuff with the reals, never learned to think about space as R^n, never learned about functions, never learned calculus, never learned about probabilities, never learned to view mathematical objects as sets) and is asked to prove e.g. the minmax theorem (or insert some other theorem in game theory that you’re familiar with)? Let's say that in this case we give you textbooks up to probability or something (though removing things that are explicitly super close to the minmax theorem). Note though that we wouldn’t be able to do sth analogous for like a math undergrad getting asked to prove the riemann hypothesis in this setup because the relevant textbooks for well-understanding the riemann hypothesis plausibly haven’t been written yet. (Or if they turn out to already have been written for the riemann hypothesis, then insert some other open problem for which the relevant textbooks haven’t been written yet — it seems likely to me that many famous open problems in math have this property.)    
   
kaarel: I guess this example might be a bit unfortunate in that to give the textbooks needed to even rigorously specify the minmax theorem statement, one gets you pretty close to a proof, which is eg very far from being the case for fermat’s last theorem. The example is also unfortunate in that maybe it’s quite hard to imagine yourself not knowing what the integers are. But then maybe stop at like middle school math instead?    
   
kaarel: Anyway, even though the minmax theorem is much easier to prove than many other theorems (like, I think it has a one-page proof given undergrad math machinery), this seems tough to me — I'm pretty sure that T = 10 days will not work in a non-galactic number of steps, and T = 100 days feels unclear (but T=1000 days very likely works).  
  
kaarel: Btw, feel free to also include calls to your non-memory-sharing instances inside your research process if that seems helpful — this kind of work-factoring would be possible with a gpt-k that samples from you-working-for-time-T — though keep in mind that this can very easily make the total number of calls galactic (e.g. making 15 internal calls each episode limits you to depth like log_{16} 10^{12} = 10). For example, if you want a note explaining x, you can ask for it and potentially get it (ie you get whatever the subtree of yous without your memories and with the ongoing memory disability manages to produce)

