
I generally like the idea that good concepts are concepts that make a bunch of useful inferences easy. For instance, a continuous function has a maximum on any closed interval, and satisfies the intermediate value property, and has a well-defined integral — these are potentially useful properties you know of something if you know it is a continuous function. And there are also lots of ways you can know something is a continuous function: a composition of continuous functions is continuous, and products and linear combinations of continuous functions are continuous, and polynomials and exponentials and trigonometric functions are continuous, and the integral of a continuous function is continuous, and the uniform limit of a sequence of continuous functions is continuous. The fact that there are lots of inferences from other properties to continuity and from continuity to other properties means that having the notion of continuity in your conceptual vocabulary opens up a lot of easy inferences for you. I think continuity is a good concept largely by virtue of this. One can tell a similar story about the notion of diamond.

Motivated by this, perhaps one can guess that there is a new useful concept to be invented/discovered when one notices that one's graph of allowed inferences has a complete bipartite subgraph which is not already explained by a concept. Like, when one has a bunch of interesting properties $A_1, A_2,\ldots,A_n$ with a bunch of the $n\times m$ pairwise inferences to the interesting properties $B_1, B_2, \ldots, B_m$ already considered valid, then maybe one should investigate if these inferences can be "factored through" a new property $X$ like $A_i \implies X \implies B_j$ (where by an implicating between properties I mean that an object having one property implies the object having the other property as well).

If one really has all the pairwise inferences $A_i\implies B_j$ already considered valid, then one can always introduce the "artificial" new concept $X=A_1\lor \cdots \lor A_n$ or $X=B_1\land \cdots \land B_m$ (either choice satisfies the property required above). But I think one would like to have a new concept $X$ that is simple and/or easy to work with. In particular, we want it to be easy to prove each $A_i\implies X$ and $X\implies B_j$. That is, we want $X$ to be a good auxiliary notion to track for proving each $A_i\implies B_j$. In practice, I think we do often tentatively go with sth a lot like these cheat notions. For example, if you don't know how to rigorously think about heat, it's quite natural to think as follows:
* "Heat is the/a thing such that: it makes you feel a certain warm way, and it makes you sweat, and it causes ice to melt and water to boil, and it is given by sunlight, fire, and clothes, and being in water takes it away, and there's more of it in the summer." That is: "heat is the/a thing caused by abc, and the/a thing causing xyz" or just "heat is the thing with properties 123".
This tentative way to get at heat can be overhauled later when one finds a nicer way to get at heat, ie finds a nicer notion which still makes it so (most of) these properties are true and ideally with it now making better sense that these properties are true. But you can already do a lot of useful thinking before that, with this sort of tentative notion.

But there doesn't need to be one definition of X that makes all the inferences/properties easy to see. In math, it is quite common to have multiple definitions of the same thing, with each making some properties easy to see, with a "fundamental theorem of the notion" proving these definitions are equivalent (consider all the classic "TFAE"s in a math textbook, https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/TFAE ). For example, the dimension of a vector space is the size of any maximal linearly independent set, or the size of any minimal spanning set, or the size of any linearly independent spanning set. We could say that the fact that all of these a priori different quantities are equal is "the fundamental theorem supporting the dimension notion". When you've gained the dimension notion, these a priori different things have become obviously equivalent to you. Perhaps we can think of you as having a "cheap symbolic engine" part like AlphaGeometry2 ( https://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.03544#page=4.67 ) (I think sth like this is what gives your "initial model of a situation"), and as a useful concept-gaining upgrading what inferences are quickly drawn by this cheap inference engine.
