
# Will any sufficiently advanced mind eventually have a clear criterion on its actions/path/way-of-life in mind?

some considerations against:
* to have these criteria in a precise form, one might need to have understood what kind of being one is or decided to be a certain kind of being. this seems limiting! like this seems like the kind of thing which limits one's understanding majorly (as thinking better involves reprogramming oneself on all levels). but maybe there's a way to do this specifying of all values without so limiting oneself?
* let's say this looks like having some axioms in front of you and being like: yes, these are good axioms. i'm happy to just have these guide my actions now forever. this seems vaguely in contradiction with incompleteness. but i really need to make this more precise
* there is by default no nice split between the understanding-component of a mind and the value-component — instead, there's probably some messy thing where one's values are everywhere in one's understanding. when a criterion on one's actions has been forever-accepted, i guess the value-component has been factored out. is there some natural process which makes this happen? does this happen by explicit decision(s)? this also causes some tension, because crystallizing some values now feels hard-to-separate from crystallizing some understanding, which seems like a very bad thing, because the understanding will be deficient 
* presently, one's values are specified in an understanding of the world which is confused. it seems plausible that our understanding of the world will always be meaningfully confused. after a criterion has been accepted, i guess one's values would somehow no longer be specified in the component of one's understanding which is confused, but in some safe component which is not confused? what would that look like? is that possible without sacrificing a lot of what one cared about before? is there some process causing a convergence toward such a state?
	* one issue here is that our understanding is ultimately a lot like a system of technologies to do stuff, and this system can always become much better
* can we even imagine a mind which accepts some criterion stably? like having a setup where 'takeover' is forever-prevented seems likely to be really limiting on the mind? also, it seems really natural for a mind to critique itself on all levels, including one's present criterion, and to be open to changing itself on all levels. even if we make it so that what's written in a certain slot never gets overwritten, one can of course simply start to relate differently to the contents of that slot
* it seems pro tanto good to be able to go back to a previous standpoint and reevaluate things from that standpoint (one consideration: one needs to make fraught choices to do stuff at all, but that seems really dangerous if one might not be able to return after if one realizes something) — choosing a clear standard seems in gross tension with that?

