
the claim is that getting very far requires 'accepting new values' (whatever that means). the claim is kinda that accepting new values is plausibly even 'good wrt the old values', at least for 'old values' which are prompting you to figure out very much not-too-slowly

* it might be better to think of things in terms of routines and new tools. new routines and new tools come with both 'new understanding' and 'new values' by default — they just change what you're up to
* avoiding new values makes more sense given a picture with global optimality, but this is probably fake. it's probably more about working out your projects in your own time. to work out these projects well, you could easily want to incorporate things which have a big effect on your direction 
* in humans, we just get positive associations i guess (valence stuff, maybe), and might easily treat things with these associations as sorta terminally good, or maybe sometimes not if we have some story about how these are merely instrumental for achieving our true values or something, but generally at least kinda terminally. should/could this be avoided though? it feels like our values would be modified by getting rid of this, because they are already sorta built with some intention of this happening? but maybe one could get rid of this in a different system anyway. you might still always need to track and modify which methods of thinking are good and add new methods with quality assessment, including in whatever component is supposed to be doing this tracking, if there is some separate such component in your plan for a sufficiently paranoid mind. so plausibly there's an echo of this in every agent
* values are largely stated in language, to the extent that they are given at all (at least for humans). language needs to change, because understanding needs to change!

# concrete examples

Alice thinks of herself as a utilitarian. In particular, she wants to make there be a diverse collection of happy people (because she takes there to be diminishing utility in the number of pretty similar experiences, let's say). She goes about her business making it so there are very many different happy people around in our universe (for the purpose of this thought experiment, you should imagine Alice's notion of happiness to be some simple thing that she could basically understand). She comes across the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics, and she comes to view it as probably right. Let's say that she now reasons: well, all the branches of the wave function really exist, and just like it is totally fine for two different happy societies who wouldn't be interacting to be in galaxies which are closer or further, it is fine for the two societies to be in different branches of the wave function. And now that might change her actions a lot — for example, if it is cheaper to make lots of pretty similar clones of some happy person in a single universe (ie cheaper than making the same number of very different people), she might be fine with flipping a bunch of quantum coins to pick one happy prototype person and to then fill the universe with clones of that person — now each 

Bob is a basically good and smart guy who however thinks of valuing in a not very philosophically sophisticated way. Then he comes across a utilitarian who reframes valuing in terms of making certain kinds of spacetime block worlds be actual, saying (in some sense imo correctly) this is generic, like just a different framing on any kind of caring. Now Bob thinks of more situations this way, and has different intuitions made salient when dealing with situations — eg thinking less in terms of what some action would be analogous to, and more in terms of what a spacetime block would be analogous to. This causes some major differences in Bob’s future assessments and actions and life path.