
* if anything is terminally bad, surely murdering a human adult is terminally bad (or like: maybe it is fine eg in a defensive war, but the murdering counts terminally against the action)
* but you can say, and many do: no really, what counts against the action is not really the murdering itself, but (instead? more precisely?) violating the golden rule, or the categorical imperative, or the maximization of hedons. and you could have a moral system in which there are yet further reasons for these things being bad
* these different moral systems usually give different action-guidance in at least some hypothetical situations. but they often don’t disagree much in practice and sometimes don’t even disagree much in thought experiments that a supposed adherent has considered. relatedly, the decision between them has often not been made yet
* many humans (maybe all humans when not in a very “ideological” mood) find themselves with many “x is good/bad” judgments, without really having tags clarifying the extent to which each thing is instrumental vs terminal. such a human could be thrown into a situation with an expanded option space which calls upon them to make this distinction more. it’s pretty unclear how they should act and how they will act. i think one could easily mess things up completely
* consider a guy doing something in part to make their mother proud. is this a way the thing is instrumentally good (like, instrumental for making their mother proud) or terminally good (like, their mother being proud could be terminally good, and so a reason why doing the thing would be terminally good). for instance, the guy might trust their mother’s judgment, or otherwise treat their mother as a “sound part of the computation of moral truth”. i think it is often just fundamentally not (yet) determined which one it is
* being put into a context in which instrumentality/terminality is to be better determined, one should proceed with extreme caution
* i think a standard solution in practice is to go with some of both. Like, say you find yourself thinking that working on this problem in statistical mechanics is good, and you want to clarify whether it is good for learning, or good for having fun which is instrumentally good for being productive, or good for having fun which is terminally good, or instrumentally good because it helps you/humanity understand important questions abc and could lead to progress on other important problems xyz, or if it is just terminally good that you work on that particular project. If you want to decide between these, I think it's pretty standard to say: "these are probably all significant (I have no idea what remotely precise importances I should assign each, but maybe I can get away with not doing that for now)"
* insert "A: it's a good action. B: instrumentally or terminally? A: it's a good action sir" meme


