
take a diamond maximizer. a standard question is: what is the meaning of “diamond”? when it realizes there’s a better way to conceive of the world, how does “diamond” find a “meaning” given this new conception?

in usual circumstances, i think the meaning gets reattached by wanting to save a certain diamond-involving way of life. like, diamonds show up in various practices, and “diamond” is to get attached so that these practices still make sense as much as possible. sometimes you split “diamond” into two notions, if that’s a good distinction wrt your practices (say, by carbon isotope showing up in it, or if you figure out how to make a novel carbonatomlike thing and decide to consider it carbon in some sense but also not in another). so, ultimately, for beings like humans, the correct meaning is determined by this sort of thing, not by some formula (though formulas can get it right reasonably often). further, when you submit a request to max diamond to an AI as a human, what you mean by “diamond” is ultimately rightly determined by this sort of thing. so, even the meaning of “diamond” is human-system-laden; one needs to understand in principle any/all aspects of human life

so, the meaning of diamond/carbon only properly gets set by the system of human coping. we can consider a version of diamond maximizer where this is not what we meant by “diamond” (or not the meaning-game we were playing) though. but for that, it’s just not really specified how “diamond” is to get rebound in a new ontology. the request got made with nothing specified for this. like, it’s not that it’s some mysterious thing that makes sense but which we can’t quite precisely describe. instead, it is just fundamentally undefined how to rebind. of course, you can write down some rules for this. and then you’ve sort of “solved” your value rebinding problem lol! but there isn’t a deep problem here

ok it could be interesting to write down some rebinding rules which are likely to sorta agree with the actual human thing i guess, tho i don’t think there is anything that will be properly correct (except maybe sth that makes reference to basically the entirety of human life)

anyway a broader point here is that terminal values (if there is any such sensible thing) are fundamentally unmoored. “make diamond” can be pinned down by other stuff you want diamond for. if it is terminal, who knows what it means ultimately — there isn’t really anything pinning down what it should mean in the usual way meanings get pinned down. (whereas if you were making diamond for some manufacturing processes, its meaning would be moored by those. i guess the entire system of meanings as a whole could still be fundamentally unmoored/[in motion])

(im open to there being some version of value rebinding that isn’t dissolved by these considerations)