
claims are always in some background context (the context consists of stuff silently accepted i guess, of meanings of words i guess, of conceived possibilities, of contrasts brought into focus). there are many different background contexts, not one, and it is very useful that this is so. what's more, these different frames needn't be easily reconcilable. this is true in the mind of a single person, and especially true when multiple people with their own contexts are involved. it's sorta a miracle we can speak to each other (or even to ourselves) at all! (in fact we sorta can't speak to each other, in some naive strong sense)

frames are machines letting you do things. i think it can totally be right for one person to think what looks like P when they are forced to make what they think verbal and for it to be right for another person to think what looks like not P when they are forced to make what they think verbal. it can make sense for different cars to have different components — it is possible for each car to have a better component x for that car (ie copying theirs into the other would make the other worse, each way)

that said, there can be a lot of alpha in reconciliation — between frames of different people and between frames in one person. eg a reconciliation of light being wavey and light being particley giving quantum mechanics, and reconciling two different reference frames kinda leading to special relativity (the latter is kinda a more meta thing than the former; i guess the special relativity example could maybe also be stated in a more object way)
