
in alphageometry, there are two kinds of inferences: ones carried out without introducing new (auxiliary) geometric objects (maybe just points actually — am writing from memory and it doesn't matter much for our purposes), and ones carried out with introducing new objects. iirc it looks like having a "cheap deduction engine" find all the former inferences, then introducing a new object, then running the cheap deduction engine again, etc, where you can be completely brute-force with your deduction engine, but you have to be careful with introducing good auxiliary points (this is done by a language model trained for this iirc)

this makes some sense more generally. we can have things we see cheaply in some representation of a situation, and things such that we need to introduce new objects to see them. we can perhaps take what we would consider your conception of the situation to in some sense consist of all the propositions about it which you see very easily. eg you know that a giraffe is yellowish and has four legs by default — these are just given parts of your default conception of a giraffe, or at least extremely quickly given once you ask these questions — but even if you know a bunch about mammal anatomy, you might not realize that it has a stupidly long Recurrent Laryngeal Nerve without considering the aorta

some remarks:
* when you give hints on an olympiad problem, i think these often give the "auxiliary points", ie the tricky objects you need to consider. eg putnam 2025 A3 is made very easy by the hint "perfect matching". this isn't exactly introducing an object-level new construction, but it is introducing a new thing into the mental arena which makes a conjectural path to a solution very easy to see — the graph having a perfect matching implies that P2 wins because you can pair. in humans, most of the reward for a solution should be assigned to the perfect matching idea, but there is actually plenty of other stuff done by a cheap 
* whether some conclusion is generated by one's cheap inference engine without realizing anything or not can depend a bunch on the person, because it depends on what you represent by default. like, one person just knows the formula for the derivative of $1/f(x)$, whereas a second person doesn't know the formula but sees it immediately as $g(f(x))$ with $g(y)=1/y$ and so can immediately derive it using the chain rule, whereas a third person might derive the formula from the definition
* there isn't really a correct cheap inference engine, like there is in alphageometry — this inference engine needs to be learned. there might be some basic default core though which is always operational, maybe like basic object-thinking? this prompts two questions:
	* what is the core inference engine, ie the thing present in all contexts?
	* to the extent that the inference engine is different when dealing with different concepts / working in different contexts, how is it learned?
		* there cannot be an inference engine for each context that gets learned separately. there could be a contribution to the inference engine from each concept, with each of those getting learned basically separately though. is that how the context-specific inference engine gets created on the fly? how does it get created from the inference engine components for the individual concepts? what's the type signature of such a component / what data is it tracking?
* we could consider the cheap inferences "analytic" and the expensive ones "synthetic". this is a somewhat nonstandard use, but i think it actually preserves surprisingly many properties kant would ascribe to "analytic" and "synthetic". we could consider this an interesting nonstandard precisification of the analytic/synthetic distinction
* 