
what do you do when someone tells you "please find a blue duck wearing a red scarf in this picture" and you find it? a string of words gets turned into a visual classifier/recognizer sort of thing. a simple model would be:
* you have as primitives checkers of properties of blueness, duckness, scarfness, redness. the blueness and duckness are ANDed into a blueduck-ness classifier/recognizer. ditto for redness and scarfness, getting redscarf-ness, and then there's a "wearing" primitive that connects these two into a blueduckwearingredscarf classifier? just ANDing them together, ie looking for a place in the picture where all fire, does pretty well i guess. you could have a picture where there are lots of blue ducks holding red scarves and only one wearing a red scarf, and on such a picture this wouldn't work. (in practice, you might in fact try scanning for a blue blob first, and then if there's lots of blue, switch to scanning for any red blob, and so on. it's not like there is a universal scanning you implement — what scanning to implement is somewhat free. there is however a definite criterion on the final answer — it has to actually be a blue duck wearing a red scarf.) i guess in principle you could scan the picture, consider the objects one by one, and ask for each one if it is a blue duck wearing a red scarf. you'd maybe be asking if it is blue, if it is a duck, if it is wearing a scarf, and if that scarf is red. all of these questions have to make sense and return yes, and then you judge it to be a blue duck wearing a red scarf. i guess there is a remaining 