
alternative title: a reflection on reflection

I used to think that reflection was like, a weird thing you sometimes do, but I think I now think it’s central to solving problems. I think the change is quite well-captured by listing examples that I would have listed if asked to list examples of reflection previously and listing examples I see as reflection now. Here are some things I would maybe have listed when asked to list examples of reflection a year ago:
* You try to track the quality of your thought in various conditions; you can maybe use this to then create/select conditions in which you think better. For example, you might keep a spreadsheet in which you mark your research output on a week and which of two diets you were following (deciding at random which of the two diets to follow at the beginning of each week, say), and try to use the results to optimize your diet to think better.
* You sit down to solve a (research or olympiad) problem and try to explicitly introspect about which kinds of high-level mental moves you use when attempting to solve it. You think about which moves were successful, how to modify these moves to make them more successful, etc.. You then create some (mental) notes to yourself with proposed changes to your inventory of mental moves.

Maybe a unifying thing here is that I was taking reflection to require seeing yourself as a whole as this reasoning system, or maybe requiring some explicit awareness of the reflection, whereas you can reflect just fine in the sense I now have in mind while only looking at a particular reasoning-pattern without having to see yourself as a whole reasoning system or without having to understand that you are doing the reflection, i.e., you can be "non-reflective" about your reflection. To say more about the nature of my blindness here: when I was going “hmm, what are some cases where I could imagine doing reflection”, I ended up thinking about cases where one knows one is doing reflection —  this might have to do with cases in my memory with a reflection tag being those where the reflection was itself thought about. Instead of trying to think of cases of reflection, perhaps I’d have been better off:
* thinking about a bunch of ~random thinkings and trying to see if they involved reflection (of course, this has some danger of causing me to think falsehoods if I’m too good at applying the lens even if not appropriate — this is a danger I’m trying to track as I'm listing examples below)
* thinking about what it would mean to reflect, by which in this case i just mean translating it to other terms (eg maybe i could have said: an example of thinking reflectively could be to create some object by observing one’s thought (this seems like a bad example; there must be a better example surely)), and then querying memory again with these different terms, seeking examples in these other terms

some intermediate stage (before talking to tsvi about this):
* we can notice common tools in mathematical proofs, this is sort of noticing common reasoning-patterns that have possibly not been codified (is that the right word? is it “reified”?) into mathematical theorems yet? (eg that for union bounds on compact spaces, you can use nets)

We think together about $x$ and about thinking-about-$x$. (Some of the examples below will be about the language we use when talking about stuff; you might object that the language is simply figurative in these cases, and we really just mean to talk about the thing in each case; I in some sense I agree that we are talking about the $\approx$same thing in each case, but I don't think this is x (separately from thinking-about-x) — I think we are thinking about the same thing in each case precisely in virtue of thinking [about $x$ and thinking-about-$x$] together; anyway, I do think the language provides some evidence; at least I take it minimally to be a useful way to notice reflection; I'm sympathetic to considering some adjacent linguistic (especially etymological) arguments rather silly; in any case, you should feel free to ignore the linguistic argument insofar as you can, and think about what you might really be mentally doing when you think about $x$ and thinking-about-$x$, though it seems reasonable to take the linguistic data as a starting point for this investigation.)
* many examples from mathematics of considering something in a certain way and then turning that into a mathematical object, eg: ignoring sth gets turned to quotients, things and connections into a graph, doing operations into a turing machine, applying transformations into a group, mathematical proving itself into listing sentences in first-order logic about sets starting from the ZFC axioms, I guess like ~every definition maybe really? universal property definitions can make it almost explicit how objects are devices to be used by us in certain ways — in these cases with the structure of the device being sorta uniquely determined by a certain property which is essentially a description of how it can be used, like almost a specification of its purpose
* stuff from physics: einstein with relativity, statistical mechanics
* When we talk about something, we often explicitly talk about talking or thinking about that thing instead, and we don't even notice the difference! For instance, it's common in mathematics to say "Let's consider the set $S$ of all blabla" which feels so similar to "Let $S$ be blablabla" . At least on the surface, the former is asking you to do some considering, whereas the directly latter is doing the considering, which would be, in some explicit sense, a big difference!
* When you write a book about ethics, you might call it metaethics, even though “metaethics” is not what the book is about! The book is about ethics! Of course, this is caused by two options being possible on the bottom level: you can title a book “fuzzy-non-human-made robots”, or you can call it “biology”. This leaves you just with the title “metabiology” if you want to talk solely about the study of fuzzy-non-human-made-robots — i.e., without talking about fuzzy-non-human-made-robots. But also, a book on fuzzy-non-human-made-robots will talk a bunch about how one studies fuzzy-non-human-made-robots.
* we don’t just see evidence and draw conclusions from it; we talk about the evidence
* you can think about x, and thinking about x, but also and thinking about thinking about x; is this process just “the dialectic”? we can also see a discussion as just responding on the object-level though, not as always thinking about the other’s thinking? how does that work? maybe the entire point is that even though there’s a major distinction here in principle, there isn’t that much of a possible practical divergence here, as humans do these things together by default?
* what follows after “how could i have deduced/understood this quicker?”
* vnm prefs
* kolmogorov probs
* bayesian updating
* moral uncertainty
* “which angles of attack have i tried?”
* “what are some analogous arguments?”
* need to examine one's concepts to add new ones, examine one's incoherencies to make new distinctions
* ask what makes an idea useful for a certain purpose (e.g. "what property of the fourier transform makes it work in this argument? maybe that it interacts nicely with the additive group structure of $\mathbb{R}$?") to better recognize cases in which it might be useful in the future (well, cases in which one can see that one needs something to fulfill a certain purpose) and to be better able to generalize the idea to something more widely applicable (e.g., one might extend the fourier transform to other groups by seeking something which interacts nicely with the structure of a general group)
* you contemplate a way of relating elements of a set to other elements of the set. you make this into an object — into a relation on the set. you can now start to, for example, relate this relation to other relations
* you think you've succeeded in proving a theorem, but you realize the argument doesn't quite work. you then think about how you might fix the argument. (note the thinking about the argument, in addition to thinking 'directly' about the mathematical objects.)
* mathematics itself is/contains the study of mathematical methods? even though mathematicians don't see this clearly themselves? why do we need the philosophy of mathematics then? what good does the present inquiry do? one thing phil of math does is studying those mathematical methods that are tough to make precise and/or tough to see
* think of what you're up to when trying to prove something. you do some very object-level thinking sometimes, like calculating out some examples. you sometimes look at your proof attempt: where to refactor it, which parts seem hardest to make work, which other strategies would fit in this context, how you could change the theorem to make a proof attempt of this kind succeed. this looking at the proof is already going meta, but we do it seamlessly. you sometimes take a step further up and ask which strategies for proof-analysis seem promising here — should you . a reference: https://youtu.be/EGUMPr9GN8Y?t=3630
* we don't just assign probabilities to statements in some unobserved fashion — we think constantly about which probabilities to assign, eg trying to draw analogies to other cases where we are confident about how to assign probabilities well; if we take our probabilities to be largely an aspect of how we think about something, then this is sorta meta-level — it involves thinking about how it'd be right/good to think about something. (this also holds for truth instead of probability.) that said: there's a version of this which says that you are always entirely doing a meta-level thing when assigning probabilities, and i think that's wrong/confused; i do want to say that there is some weird blend here though — like we could perhaps sorta imagine a system that does stuff with probabilities without ever looking at and analyzing its own probability assignments and using that to assign probabilities better, and i just want to say that we are much more reflective about probabilities than such a system. but here i'm no longer sure if this point deserves to be its own point at all, as maybe it's too much of a special case of observing our thinking to improve it, with probabilities being less 'in-the-world' than other things at best making that point slightly clearer, but really not adding much particular substance?

a counter: concretely, what of this couldn't one also just do on the object level? like, instead of relating objects and then defining a relation, why couldn't one just define the damn relation? instead of then relating this relations to other relations, why couldn't one just define a relation on relations, and so on? 

maybe sorta crucial to this working (perhaps some of this could be useful for constructing an artificial reflective reasoning system, perhaps starting from constructing a reflective logic? or maybe it shouldn’t be a logic to see itself properly? it needs to somehow be more dynamic? idk)

# related

“In learning a paradigm the scientist acquires theory, methods, and standards together, usually in an inextricable mixture.”

Excerpt From
The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
Kuhn, Thomas S.
This material may be protected by copyright.