
When we make and use good analogies, a bunch of mental structure that plays a role in our understanding of one thing quickly becomes able to also play an important role in our understanding of another thing.^[This is one important theme in how a human develops novel understanding, and in how humanity develops novel understanding.] The present note is about the [world soul](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anima_mundi) analogy — the analogy between a human and humanity. More broadly, it is about conceiving (to some extent) of the whole developing shebang of stuff in our universe as a mind/agent.

related: [the box inversion hypothesis](https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/TQwXPHfyyQwr22NMh/box-inversion-hypothesis), [Hegel's Weltgeist](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geist#Weltgeist)

# imo-good thoughts that the analogy helps one think about humanity

* a human can make decisions, and humanity can make decisions
* a human can engage in projects, and humanity can engage in projects 
* a human can learn, and humanity can also learn — can gain understanding and knowledge
* a human can be more or less guided by reason in a decision, more or less thoughtful about how to live; so can humanity
* a human is reflective, and humanity is reflective
* a human can study how they work, and humanity can study how it works

# imo-good thoughts that the analogy helps one think about humans and potential AI minds
* maybe minds are technological things, made of increasingly many structures and structural ideas. maybe a mind is like a whole developing technological world
* some people hope to use interp ultimately to make a good AGI by intervening on a bad AGI (there are also other hopes; this note isn't about those). maybe even extremely radical interp success, where we see the low-level stuff but also higher-level stuff and stuff really not nicely seen in terms of the low-level stuff and stuff really extremely hard for us to understand, would only get us to seeing an AI sorta the way we currently see society. now, how would we intervene in society to really make society strongly protect ants (imagine us finding it easy to do high-level changes, eg changing a bible passage and rewriting everyone's memories of that passage (actually this particular example is extremely fucked because really a lot of stuff will be tangled up with the bible passage and you somehow have to make a new kinda-coherent belief/world-system and that seems really extremely hard even given what we already assumed))? one can maybe counter: the issue is that the proper place at which to intervene in society is inside humans, which we don't understand. one can countercounter: to some extent it's true that one would want to intervene inside humans at least IN ADDITION TO wanting to intervene outside humans, but also actually there's not something in there that looks nice bro. it will look like a total fucking mess at least to the extent society or the economy look like a total fucking mess. one can also be confused like this: "wait obviously you can just like intervene to make society really great to ants by making like an extremely powerful ant-aligned world government run by uplifted ants". my response to this is: you're missing the point. please notice that the thing you're making is at at least (roughly) the same level of complexity as the entire system. this isn't properly conceived of as an intervention on an existing AI. it's pretty much like saying your intervention on the AI is to replace it with a completely different AI. (yes you could hope to use interp to gain understanding that lets you make this new AI but this is not the hope we're discussing right)


# places where the analogy doesn't work well
* for any high-level action, it seems easily possible for a single human to just decide not to do it. you can just decide never to do heroin, you can just decide not to engineer and release a virus that kills you, and you can just decide not to make an AI more capable than you that controls the world then. you can realize that something is a bad idea, and record in your mind that you aren't going to do it, and then have that guide you in basically every context. it'd be bizarre for you to accidentally engineer and release a pathogen that kills you — you'd need to remember your decision not to do that thing. in humanity, it seems harder to have all actions be constrained by some decision. in some relevant sense, there's more independent stuff going on. different people make up their minds separately, and some might decide to make an AI that kills everyone, or be confused. understanding doesn't propagate as easily, it doesn't as reliably offer guidance to actions it would be relevant for. decisions are harder to (near-)universally enforce, decisions guiding different actions are less correlated
	* well, cancer is still a thing