
* minds can figure things out. minds can answer questions, and make progress on questions. minds can solve problems. an approach to understanding thinking is to try to understand this great epistemic game.
* i suspect that the explanation of thinking along these lines that i want to give will, at least initially, not be very reductive. the explanation will involve some basic BIG building blocks. ultimately, one wants to understand how these building blocks function. but perhaps one will be able to be fairly happy with an understanding of each element as being obtained by some operation on previous elements. one might be happy with seeing the whole thing as an organic developing system, with a history
* however, note that if you can make sense of say a questioning or an answering in terms of other questionings and answerings, it is in principle possible for this explanation to not be circular, in at least two ways:
	* first, the system could simply be largely constituted by elements which stand in such and such relations to each other, with this sort of outer relatedness of each element to other elements being a lot of EVERYTHING there is to that element. for example, by saying a bunch of stuff like "1 is the successor of 0" and "2 is the successor of 1" and "1+1 = 2" and "the predecessor of 3 is 2" and "3-1 = 2", i might well be telling you in some sense all there is to know about what the natural numbers are. it could look like i'm only defining stuff in terms of other stuff that has not already been properly specified, perhaps amounting to nothing intelligible? but really having elements with certain relations just is ALL there is to the natural numbers. no further explanation of the true constitution of the number 3 is necessary; perhaps it would in some sense even be "philosophically incorrect" to look for a further explanation
		* in the case of the game of questions and answers, there will in fact be further interesting structure making playing the game possible which is not in the interrelations of questions, answers, notions. so i'm not claiming it is all in that structure. but i AM saying that it is simply wrong to think that speaking of interrelations between (say) questions necessarily constitutes no progress at all toward making sense of the game of questions and answers. at least in principle, it could constitute a great deal of progress (whether it in fact does will need to be seen by further investigation)
	* second, we could be grounding questions, answers, notions, etc in more basic questions, answers, notions, etc, ultimately grounding out in say basic perceptive abilities and action. 
* 