

i'd like to understand what sort of understanding is constructed in a human mind when something new is being described. let's read the first paragraph of Borges's Tlön, Uqbar Orbis Tertius, and try to guess what is happening as one reads it:
	I owe the discovery of Uqbar to the conjunction of a mirror and an encyclopedia. The mirror troubled the depths of a corridor in a country house on Gaona Street in Ramos Mejia; the encyclopedia is fallaciously called The Anglo-American Cyclopaedia (New York, 1917) and is a literal but delinquent reprint of the Encyclopaedia Britannica of 1902. The event took place some five years ago. Bioy Casares had had dinner with me that evening and we became lengthily engaged in a vast polemic concerning the composition of a novel in the first person, whose narrator would omit or disfigure the facts and indulge in various contradictions which would permit a few readers — very few readers — to perceive an atrocious or banal reality. From the remote depths of the corridor, the mirror spied upon us. We discovered (such a discovery is inevitable in the late hours of the night) that mirrors have something monstrous about them. Then Bioy Casares recalled that one of the heresiarchs of Uqbar had declared that mirrors and copulation are abominable, because they increase the number of men. I asked him the origin of this memorable observation and he answered that it was reproduced in The Anglo-American Cyclopaedia, in its article on Uqbar. The house (which we had rented furnished) had a set of this work. On the last pages of Volume XLVI we found an article on Upsala; on the first pages of Volume XLVII, one on Ural-Altaic Languages, but not a word about Uqbar. Bioy, a bit taken aback, consulted the volumes of the index. In vain he exhausted all of the imaginable spellings: Ukbar, Ucbar, Ooqbar, Ookbar, Oukbahr .... Before leaving, he told me that it was a region of Iraq or of Asia Minor. I must confess that I agreed with some discomfort. I conjectured that this undocumented country and its anonymous heresiarch were a fiction devised by Bioy's modesty in order tojustify a statement. The fruitless examination of one of Justus Perthes' atlases fortified my doubt.

here's a guess about what happens:
* something new is being talked about! construct a new object!
* give it the name-property "Uqbar"
* give it the property discovered-via-conjunction-of-a-mirror-and-an-encyclopedia
	* also the property in-its-discovery-a-mirror-was-involved, and ditto for encyclopedia?
* also create an object for that mirror and an object for that encyclopedia. they get initialized with all the standard properties of a mirror/encyclopedia marked as probably present. this can be done implicitly, via an association of the new object with the [mirror] notion and the [encyclopedia] notion
* 