(This is copied with very minor edits from a Discord message Kaarel wrote.)

It currently seems to me like the experimental setup below this is obviously an interesting thing to consider to experimentally study computation in superposition, but my outside view tells me I'm confused — lmk. (Has this setup been considered by others?)
    
* Construct a sparse high-dimensional ReLU layer, i.e., with a sparse 0/1 weight matrix (and maybe with biases set to a certain negative integer in the simplest case). (One could also as easily pick a synthetic network with many layers here, or maybe even a network trained on some task with an activation sparsity penalty. This training could also happen while the parallel network and readoffs (described below) are trained. 0/1 entries could also be replaced with some other sparse random variable.)
* Let the data set have sparse 0/1 input vectors in the high-dim input layer (can also consider the continuous case). I think the nicest case has the weight matrix sparsity and bias chosen such that overall sparsity stays constant across layers (in expectation).
* Study how [[whether (more precisely: how well) this computation can be compressed to a lower-dimensional space] depends on [the dimensions and sparsity]]. More precisely, denoting the big layer U_1->U_2 and letting V_1->V_2 be a corresponding small layer that's supposed to do the same thing in superposition, then I think we want to train a ReLU layer V_1->V_2 together with a linear embedding U_1->V_1 and a linear readoff V_2->U_2, with the loss being some kind of 'error loss', ie incentivizing the difference between the two different paths into V_2 to be small (ie U_1->V_1->V_2->U_2 and U_1->U_2), ie a loss capturing 'to what degree the diagram doesn't commute'; tho maybe not L^2 (which I think is usually used for reconstruction loss) but like L^6 or whatever (to better capture epsilon-readability).
 
 (In practice, one can of course compose the first two maps (U_1->V_1->V_2) into one ReLU layer, ie one doesn't need V_1. I've included it in the description here so that it's clearer what this is supposed to capture. But in the one-layer case, the experimental setup would just look like trying to do a big sparse relu computation with a small relu computation. In the multilayer case, one should include readoffs from each V_i to U_i. I think one has a real choice between whether to include embeddings into every layer or not — this corresponds roughly to whether one believes in activation-vecs-as-linear-combos-of-features or just in readoffs. Not including linear embeddings but seeing if they happen anyway is another interesting thing to try to figure out experimentally, I think, and could provide some evidence for the linear combo subhypothesis of the superposition hypothesis.)

some remarks/credits:
* I should say that a significant amount of credit for this goes to Tomáš Gavenčiak in a discussion; this in addition to the usual suspects: Mendel, Vaintrob, Rimsky, and others 🙂 . Adam Shai and Clem von Stengel and probably others should also get some credit for discussions.
* Jake Mendel and I considered some alternative versions of this many months ago but they ended up having weird TMS diagrams in them, I think with linear combo assumptions (as opposed to just readoffs) and/or ReLUs causing them to generally seem sort of uncompelling. (I forget precisely what % of the uncompellingness this captures, but an example thing that was causing problems was that the TMS ReLUs from V_2 to U_2 were intuitively able to do computation, as they indeed are — lol.)
* To motivate this a bit more: this precisely intends to answer "Construct a monosemantic toy model, then compress that into a smaller model in superposition. Study what kinds of errors this tends to produce, how the weights in the smaller model are related to those in the larger one, etc." from https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/jan-update/index.html#open-problems .
* This also seems like the toy model whose 'dual' is https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/jan-update/index.html#predict-future (in the same sense that TMS's 'dual' is the sparse autoencoder used in eg https://transformer-circuits.pub/2023/monosemantic-features/index.html)
