
tl;dr: it's easy to think of deference as just (partly) adopting the views of someone else, and to think this is unproblematic if the other person is more reasonable/informed on the relevant matters than you are. but especially for deference on things which are less tied to some concrete observation or action, you should maybe remember that naive deference is like finding a car built by aliens (whose car technology you respect), taking whatever piece in it is closest to a carburetor, and trying to replace your (working) car's carburetor with that piece. if you do this, you will now in some sense have a better 'carburetor', but also, your car will probably not run. you could maybe make your car run again with the alien 'carburetor' by rebuilding other components around it, but this takes a bunch of hard work. quite plausibly, this isn't a good way to improve your car.

or be careful about mixes of inside and outside view. i recorded two voice notes outlining two issues:
1) if naively propagate a little after deferring, you can easily start doing a bunch of silly things. (and this is not just from some external perspective inaccessible and so irrelevant to you — you can in fact know they are silly by thinking about what's going on from the outside, as we are doing now.) the issue is that the update will contradict lots of stuff if your conception of the world was previously sorta locally coherent. now you start doing a bit renormalizing, but it is easy to get fucked by this. it seems totally plausible that a lot would need to change about your beliefs to get to an overall better web of beliefs for you to hold. like, your current beliefs are pretty good! they are pretty coherent! your previous belief had been caused by a bunch of other all probably reasonable beliefs; now you've created some tension with these beliefs, and resolving this tension could easily make you predictably more wrong (even though this is not a kind of thing that can happen for an ideal bayesian or a solomonoff inductor or something or something). having incoherence is bad also because now you obviously sorta can't trust even slightly long chains of reasoning. it's very valuable to have structured understanding; heavy internal deference pushes your understanding to be a structureless soup; this soup cannot think. it's very important that you can think!!
2) can look like deferring, but really the same surface-level sentence has different meanings for two people, so not really adopting their belief even! could be really off in fact! this could be hard to see for a straw-bayesian, for whom a language is fixed and learning is about assigning probabilities to stuff in the language. developing genuinely novel understanding (for an embedded agent that isn't just doing some finding-out of which universe they are in, but struggling to envisage even a single coherent universe (especially in which all the concepts it holds to could be made sense of)) is largely not well-captured by this, and people can have very different languages. maybe imagine yourself having very different languages over time and try to 10x that difference or something.

maybe it's good to, instead of going directly from [person X thinks blabla] to [blabla is maybe right i guess], explicitly think: "i'm updating on person X endorsing string blabla" (though ofc also be careful about cases where the person might not actually even be endorsing that string, and the expression that you took to be an endorsement was caused by something else). this is like plausibly the 'philosophically more correct' update to make anyway. and thinking of it this way makes it immediate that you can defer directly if you trust the person and it's some very concrete thing, like if they are your lab assistant reading some number on a measurement device to you, and you should be more careful about straightforwardly deferring for more abstract claims. i guess another good aspect is that it makes you think about what could have led person X to endorse the string (because it helps to think about these causes of the endorsement to update on observing the endorsement), which seems like a healthier way to defer anyway — it might make you think about a bunch of more concrete-ish stuff (playing around with certain mathematical examples, certain empirical observations, certain chains of reasoning) behind their belief, and then at the end of the day you might just evaluate this more concrete stuff yourself, updating on it appropriately yourself. and a final good property: when you reduce deference to this concrete statement, maybe you're just generally more likely to handle the update well

it's also basically a good idea i think to just keep separate registers for one's inside view and outside view(s) (and to be mindful about how you let them interact). inside every person ought to be at least an epistemic wolf and an epistemic sheep