
By a lasso, let's mean something that collects a bunch of 'existing objects' (or possibly just one existing object). By a 'wand', let's mean something that makes a new object out of the objects in this collection. Each lasso comes together with an associated wand; one applies a lasso and the associated wand in succession to create a new object. For example, [Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zermelo–Fraenkel_set_theory) has an [axiom of pairing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom_of_pairing) which lets you lasso in two sets $S,T$ and tap a wand to make another set which contains these two sets as elements: $\{S,T\}$; it also has an [axiom of union](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom_of_union) which lets you pull in a single set $S$ (whose elements are necessarily other sets — in ZF, every thing is a set) and tap a wand to make the set which is the union of its elements: $\bigcup_{T\in S} T$. In mathematics and elsewhere, it is common to define a structure as a collection which is closed under certain [lasso+wand]ings. To make this work out particularly nicely, let us also allow lassos+wands where the lasso is nullary — it catches no objects. For example, a [topology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topological_space#Definition_via_open_sets) $\tau$ on a set $X$ is a collection of subsets of $X$ which is closed under the following [lasso+wand]s:
* a lasso that collects nothing and a wand that makes $\emptyset$;
* a lasso that collects nothing and a wand that makes $X$;
* a lasso that takes any (finite or infinite) collection of elements from $\tau$ and a wand that makes their union;
* a lasso that takes any finite collection of elements from $\tau$ and a wand that makes their intersection.

A particular way in which examples of such structures are obtained in mathematics is by pointing at a certain starting collection $G$, specifying certain lasso+wand-s, and saying: let $S$ be the 'smallest' collection which contains $S$ and is closed under the given [lasso+wand]s. We might call $S$ the closure of $G$ (under the given [lasso+wand]s). Here, we say a collection is smallest among collections with a property iff it is contained in every collection with that property. Note that since if you have two smallest elements $S_1$ and $S_2$, then $S_1\subseteq S_2$ and $S_2\subseteq S_1$, so the smallest collection is unique if it exists. However, since there are sets of collections with no minimal element, you might worry that there might not be any such smallest collection. However, as long as there is any collection at all which contains $G$ and is closed under the given [lasso+wand]s, there must be a smallest one. This is because the intersection of the set of collections containing $G$ and closed under the [lasso+wand]s is itself a collection containing $G$ which is closed under the given [lasso+wand]s [^1]; indeed, it is a minimal one. For example, suppose someone has revealed having certain preferences between some pairs of objects, given to us as a starting collection of comparisons: $G=\{x>y$, $y>z$, $x>w\}$. We could then define the transitive closure of their revealed preferences as the smallest set of preferences which is [closed under the lasso+wand of picking a pair of preferences of the form $a>b$, $b>c$ and returning $a>c$] and contains the given preferences. In our example, the transitive closure is $\{x>y$, $y>z$, $x>w$, $x>z\}$. But if our person had initial preferences $G=\{x>y$, $y>z$, $z>x\}$, and we are only allowing collections of preferences with no instance of $a>a$, then there would not have been any set of transitive preferences containing $G$, so no smallest such set either.

someone's preferences as the smallest set of preferences which is transitive 

This provides a top-down[^2] definition 

now, let $S$ be all the stuff you can make with your [lasso+wand]-s starting from $G$. We might say that $S$ is generated by $G$ (given such-and-such [lasso+wand]s), or that S is the span of $G$. 

## Conceiving iteratively of lasso+wand constructions

## Lassos that can only grab finitely many things => finite iteration

For example, the [algebra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Field_of_sets) of subsets of $\mathbb{N}$ generated by the singleton sets $\{0\},\{1\},\ldots$ consists of precisely the finite sets and their complements (the cofinite sets), and every finite sets can be reached from the starting sets using finitely many [lasso+wand]ings (in fact, in this case, just a finite union of singletons or a finite intersection of their complements would do).

Note that this applies even if you have infinitely many lasso+wands at your disposal (as long as each individual lasso is finite)!


### An example of a case where generating ends much earlier
Here's a fun example of a case with infinitely many infinite lassos where a single step with a small lasso nevertheless suffices:
> Convex hull. The convex hull of a set $G\subseteq \mathbb{R}^n$ is the set of all points which are obtained by 
thm saying you only have to do finitely many things



## Infinite lassos and transfinite iteration
What about infinite lassos? Will we 
Infinite lassos can sometimes also turn out to only require finitely many steps. For example, for the closure of a set in a topological space, only one step is required.

> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Borel_set#Generating_the_Borel_algebra

See also [here](https://math.stackexchange.com/a/740350/540174) for a presentation by Andrés E. Caicedo of the proof by Georg Cantor and Ivar Otto Bendixson that any closed set of reals is either countable or has the cardinality of the reals which uses transfinite iteration that stops at some countable ordinal order.



> 


## Frege's lasso+wand

Suppose you can see all the mathematical objects clearly. Then it seems intuitively plausible that you could lasso the set of objects which have some certain concrete property, and then use your wand to consider that collection itself as a mathematical object. 

Not having yourself as an 
## messy

For example, an ideal $I$ in a commutative ring $R$ is a subset of $R$ which is closed under 

[convex set](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convex_set) $S$ is a subset of a vector space which is closed under convex combinations: that is, whenever we lasso in $x,y\in S$, and apply a $\lambda$-wand (let's say there's a different to make $


a [topology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topological_space#Definition_via_open_sets) on a ground set $X$ is a collection of subsets of $X$ such that 

I got these terms and this picture from [Thomas Forster's *The Iterative Conception of Set*](https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=0bbac670575ad7b8928b801f01d9f264a0a44b1d). I take it that the picture is largely from [George Boolos's *The Iterative Conception of Set*](https://canvas.eee.uci.edu/files/297883/download?download_frd=1&verifier=Mvw7mo1T9XSgGfZnZrieUaXLyA9lm6dOVXPT3i2h), who attributes it in part to Saul Kripke. It seems likely that there's type-theoretic or category-theoretic version of all this, but I don't know it.

In mathematics and elsewhere, it is common to describe a structure as something closed under certain lasso+wand operations


A clever trick often pulled is to define 

* 
* Perhaps: whenever a fully self-knowing agent knows $P$, it should also know that it knows $P$. That is, its knowledge should be closed under a lasso that pulls in a proposition $P$ and the wand that turns it into the proposition that it knows $P$
* In statistical mechanics, we might consider the macrostate that corresponds to a system $A$ being at temperature $T_A$, and the macrostate that corresponds to system $B$ being at pressure $T_B$, and then also the macrostate that corresponds to system $A$ being at $T_A$ and system $B$ being at $T_B$. We can lasso in two 


## references

Thomas Forster, The Iterative Conception of Set, https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=0bbac670575ad7b8928b801f01d9f264a0a44b1d
George Boolos, The Iterative Conception of Set, https://canvas.eee.uci.edu/files/297883/download?download_frd=1&verifier=Mvw7mo1T9XSgGfZnZrieUaXLyA9lm6dOVXPT3i2
Neil Barton, Iterative Conceptions of Set, https://neilbarton.net/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/iterative_conceptions_of_set.pdf


Wand/Set Theories, A realization of Conway’s mathematicians’ liberation movement, with an application to Church’s set theory with a universal set

[^1]: When we gather some collection in the intersection with our lasso and operate on it with our wand, this is something we could also do in any collection that's being intersected. Since all of these collections are closed under that operation, they all contain the output object, so their intersection does as well. So the intersection is also closed under that lasso+wand.
[^2]: I got this term from [this lecture](https://youtu.be/v_tPUH5NtwI?t=2190) by Joel David Hamkins.
