
from https://youtu.be/LyJ1g_EmflU

can get gödel's first incompleteness thm (that assuming math is consistent, there is a true but unprovable statement) as follows:
* in fact, there is a statement like this of the form: there is no program of length at most $9999$ which outputs the number $n$. in fact, all such statements are unprovable! this is because you can write a program of length $\leq 9999$ which for all numbers $n$ in parallel searches for a proof that no program of length at most $9999$ outputs $n$, and outputs the first $n$ for which such a proof is found. note that this can't halt, because that would make it itself a program which is of len at most $9999$ which outputs the number it does, but then it would have proved a falsehood about that number. and not only would this be a falsehood, but we could prove that there is a program of length at most $9999$ which outputs $n$, because we could list and check the steps of that very program, so, in fact, math would be inconsistent! so, again, this program doesn't halt, and thus one can't prove any statement like this — they are all unprovable. and note that all but finitely many are true as well, because there are only $2^{9999}$ programs of length at most $9999$. thus, all but finitely many of these statements are unprovable and true

can also get gödel's second incompleteness thm (that assuming math is consistent, there is no proof that it is consistent) as follows:
* note that if there were $k$ numbers of kolmo complexity at most $9999$ and we could prove there are $\leq k$ numbers of kolmo complexity at most $9999$, then we could find all $k$ with a big search and then have a proof for all the other ones that they do not have kolmo complexity at most $9999$, but then the TM above would in fact halt, and then we'd have a contradiction, and in fact we can prove: [[there are k such numbers] AND [it is provable that there are at most k]] implies provable-contradiction. so, if one could prove that there is no contradiction in math, then one could prove that for any k, either it is not provable that there are at most k or there are not k. but then if one could prove there is no contradiction, given that one can prove there are at most $2^{9999}$ and thus indeed prove that this is provable, one would then have a proof that there are not $2^{9999}$, so one would have a proof that there are at most $2^{9999}-1$. but then one could repeat until one gets down to $<0$, and conclude a contradiction. so there would then in fact be a contradiction in math! thus, one can't prove there is no contradiction
