
after writing the stuff below: Ok I think I was pretty confused here. The big point is that all this talk of capturing properties was already talk in the meta-language. So in the meta-language, we can totally say that if some relation holds, eg that something is a proof, then PA can prove 'that relation holds', I think. The usual arguments are not some magic that depends on our intuition or whatever — they make perfect sense in a meta-ZFC or something, I think. Like, we get these implications from stuff in the meta-language to PA proving 'equivalent stuff' exactly via the proofs that the PA functions we write down indeed capture the desired properties, I think. Just think of the usual arguments as being formalized in the meta-language, if you want. I need to be a bit careful here still I feel like to make sure I'm not brushing something under the rug — need to make sure that this case-by-case-proving really yields all the implications we wish.
## rosser's proof steps traced carefully

This is a response to James R Meyer's arguments that no proof of Gödel's incompleteness claim has been produced — see e.g. here https://www.jamesrmeyer.com/ffgit/godels_theorem for these arguments. I should perhaps note that I think Meyer is canonically considered a crank, but while I think he happens to be wrong about no genuine proof of incompleteness being known, his writings on incompleteness claims have seemed generally careful/not-too-unreasonable to me (I glanced briefly at his writings on other topics, and his reasoning seemed worse on these other topics to me though). For instance, I also recall finding the mixing of metalanguage provability talk and object-language claimed provability talk in https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=710 somewhat prima facie concerning — I think Meyer is expressing a version of this concern in https://www.jamesrmeyer.com/ffgit/aaronson1 . Still, I think Meyer is wrong, and I hope to provide a careful Gödelian argument below, with an emphasis on making the distinction between object-language and meta-language 'provability'/provability-talks explicit so as to make it clear that no sleight of hand is performed. So, what follows is a proof that PA is either incomplete (i.e., there is some pair $R,\neg R$ such that PA proves neither) or inconsistent (i.e., it proves sentence and its negation). All the non-quoted talking below is intended to be an abbreviation of talking in the meta-language, with some commentary in a further external language mixed in to make it clearer which thing in the meta-language I'm pointing at, and could be replaced with a formal version. (I mostly considered writing this up a helpful exercise — in particular, (1) I make no claim that other proofs are generally failing to be sufficiently careful. I think there are probably many other sufficiently careful proofs — in particular, Meyer seems to consider the computer-checked proofs mistaken in some way I haven't put much effort in to understand, and I doubt they are mistaken, and (2) I also quite strongly doubt the argument I'll give would convince Meyer.)

1. We start from the Rosser sentence $R$ which is a sentence of PA (let's say) with the property that one can prove in PA that $R$ is equivalent to the sentence $P$='if $\phi$ is a proof of $R$, then there is a proof $\psi$ of $\neg R$ which is shorter than $\phi$'. So far, I am merely using the quoted bit as an abbreviation for a particular PA sentence $P$ — the one canonically constructed, with the $R$ canonically constructed (pick any convention you like). At present, I'm not claiming any identification of $P$ with anything having to do with provability in the meta-language.
2. If there isn't a proof of $R$ in PA and also isn't a proof of $\neg R$ in PA, then PA is incomplete. We now consider the two remaining cases: where there is a proof of $R$ in PA and where there is a proof of $\neg R$ in PA.
3. Suppose that there is a proof, call it $\theta$, of $R$ in PA. Then, by chaining this proof with $R\implies P$, there is a proof in PA of $P=$'if $\phi$ is a proof of $R$, then there is a proof $\psi$ of $\neg R$ which is shorter than $\phi$'.
4. Since there is a proof $\theta$ of $R$ in PA, there is also a proof of '$\theta$ is a proof of $R$' in PA, again with '$\theta$ is a proof of of $R$' really being the PA sentence constructed in your favorite canonical way. (I'll stop mentioning that we are using some fixed canonical convention to write such things inside PA from now on, but we will continue to do so.)
	1. It seems plausible that this is a key step which Meyer would object to. I indeed don't think this is a triviality! I'm separating this out into a lemma that I'll provide a proof sketch of below.
5. Since there is a proof of '$\theta$ is a proof of $R$' in PA, and (by 2. above) there is a proof of $P$='if $\phi$ is a proof of $R$, then there is a proof $\psi$ of $\neg R$ which is shorter than $\phi$' in PA, it follows that there is a proof of 'there is a proof $\psi$ of $\neg R$ which is shorter than $\theta$' in PA.
	1. This is a more elementary tracing of an object-level implication in the meta-language than the step above, so I'm guessing this is not worth focusing on. In fact, I think nothing more problematic than the above ever happens in this proof, so while I'll keep trying to spell out each time we make another claim that PA proves something, I won't comment further on why we can do so. 
6. Let's split into cases according to whether there is a proof $\psi$ in PA of $\neg R$ which is shorter than $\theta$:
	1. If there is a proof $\psi$ in PA of $\neg R$ which is shorter than $\theta$, then PA proves $\neg R$ and proves $R$ (by assumption), and is thus inconsistent.
	2. If there is no proof $\psi$ in PA of $\neg R$ which is shorter than $\theta$, then PA can prove for each of the finitely many $\psi$ shorter than $\theta$ individually that '$\psi$ is not a proof of $\neg R$', and then further prove from this collection of strings that 'there is no $\psi$ shorter than $\theta$ which is a proof of $\neg R$'. Since we established earlier (in 4) that PA can prove 'there is a proof $\psi$ of $\neg R$ which is shorter than $\theta$', we see that PA can prove both a sentence and its negation, and is thus inconsistent.
7. It remains to consider the case where there is a proof $\rho$ of $\neg R$ in PA. Then PA can carry out this proof, and use '$\neg R \implies \neg P$' to conclude 'there is a $\phi$ which is a proof of $R$ such that there is no proof $\psi$ of $\neg R$ which is shorter than $\phi$'.
8. Additionally, PA can prove '$\rho$ is a proof of $\neg R$ in PA'.
9. From the last two sentences, PA can additionally conclude 'there is a $\phi$ shorter than $\rho$ such that $\phi$ is a proof of $R$'. 
10. Let's split into cases again according to whether there is a proof $\phi$ in PA of $R$ which is shorter than $\rho$:
	1. If there is such a proof, then PA can prove $R$; since it also proved $\neg R$ by assumption, it is then inconsistent.
	2. If there is no such proof, then PA can prove for each $\phi$ shorter than $\rho$ individually that '$\phi$ is not a proof of $R$', and then deduce from this collection that 'there is no proof $\phi$ of $R$ shorter than $\rho$'. With $9$ above, it follows that PA is inconsistent.
11. This finishes the big case check.

I don't think any magic is involved here, at least if you believe the lemma (and a bunch of other analogous claims)! Let's return to the lemma now.

Lemma. If there is a proof $\theta$ of $R$ in PA, there is a proof of '$\theta$ is a proof of $R$' in PA.
Pf. Since $\theta$ is a proof of $R$ in PA, more precisely there is a sequence of strings such that blabla. Translating that sequence into PA's quoted version of itself (according to our chosen convention) gives another sequence, and one proves that it satisfies the internal function checking that it is a proof of the internally coded $\theta$. And PA can in fact prove that it does satisfy it, so PA has a proof of this statement. (Maybe I should give a more detailed version here. The point is that the meta-language can prove that PA can capture any primitive-recursive function, including this one — the proof is given in e.g. Gödel Without Tears. Of course, that proof might be presented in usual mathematical language, but all of it could also be presented in a formal language!)





# mess 

7.  we consider two cases:
	1. Either PA can prove for some particular $\psi$ that '$\psi$ is a proof of $R$ and $\psi$ 'there is a proof $\psi$ of $\neg R$ which is shorter than $\theta$' and 


'there is a proof $\psi$ in of $\neg R$ which is shorter than $\theta$'

PA sentence '$\theta$ is a proof of $R$' has the proof given by the usual way to prove that a primitive-recursive function with a certain input has a certain output. (in this case, the primitive recursive function is the one canonically constructed for 'provability' and the input is the pair consisting of the numeral for $\theta$ and the numeral for $R$). One spells out the proof in the meta-language  