
https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=710

the rosser sentence: For all phi, if phi is a proof of this sentence, then this sentence has a shorter disproof than phi

having constructed this, we get a proof that there is no theory which is consistent (does not prove P and not-P) and complete (for all P, proves P or proves not-P), as follows:
suppose the rosser sentence is provable. then the syntax system can be presented this proof phi, but also a proof that phi is a proof of the sentence. so then it believes there is a shorter disproof than phi of this sentence. then list all the shorter disproof-attempts, check none of them work (none of them will, assuming the system is consistent), and you've proved a contradiction. suppose the negation of the rosser sentence is provable with varphi. then also you can present the syntax system a proof that varphi is a disproof of the sentence. then it can conclude from the negation of the rosser sentence together with varphi being a disproof that there is a shorter proof of the sentence than varphi. then you can check all the shorter proof-attempts, check none work (none of them will work assuming the system it is consistent), then conclude a contradiction. so we'd get a syntactic contradiction, ie the system would be inconsistent, either way. so it must be that the rosser sentence is not provable, and its negation is also not provable, so the system must be incomplete. 

now but by completeness, there is a model where the rosser sentence is true, and a model where it is false. i guess it's not very problematic for it to be true — it's just that the quantifier is empty? like in fact, it is true in the ordinary model. but how can it be false? for it to be false, it seems like we'd need there to be a proof of this sentence with no shorter disproof, but surely there isn't a proof? i think the point here is that the model which says this statement is true does not say for any one proof-attempt that this-proof-attempt-is-a-proof is true, but there indeed exists an object in its set of objects which satisfies the proofiness predicate, but this is really some weird different kind of thing that doesn't actually correspond to any sequence of strings. this might create some worry that the sentence really meaning what we think it means is somehow model-dependent. i think maybe the ans is it does from a metatheoretic pov, but the syntactic inferences still make sense? this is probably omega-inconsistent or whatever. should maybe get better intuitions for omega-inconsistent models. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%CE%A9-consistent_theory yea i think that's it, but the term applies to theories, not models. but if you adjoin that sentence, making it a theory, then we get as a theorem that any concrete integer is not a proof of the negated rosser sentence, but also the theorem that there is an integer which is a proof. in a model, this must end up being a nonstandard integer, according to a claim in the article. i think this is because if it were a standard integer, we would indeed be able to understand it as a proof; so since there isn't a proof, it must be nonstandard

also, note that we don't get a contradiction from adjoining the rosser sentence negation above (and indeed, one can't get a contradiction); we get a contradiction from assuming metatheoretically that it has a disproof. 


## scrap
the ans i think is that the model does some weird shit to interpret stuff. even though we take the rosser sentence to mean 'what it says', this model doesn't. but then the question is: wait didn't we cheat in the proof above? isn't it supposed to be purely syntactic that the rosser sentence says what it does, otherwise how could the proof above go through? i think the answer here is that the argument above does actually work, like the inferences the reasoning system needs to draw are indeed purely syntactic. like it can talk about these finitely many proofs, think about each at once, rule them out by case analysis, and then indeed conclude some contradiction. in the model where the rosser sentence e

