
Here are some concrete-ish things that would update me somewhat towards thinking that we can pretty much just supervised-probe GPT-AGI for its beliefs (let me know if any of these are silly for technical reasons), ordered in decreasing probability of a positive result and increasing likelihood ratio corresponding to a positive result:

1) Repeat Alex's fine-tuning experiment but just fine-tune for longer, basically as long as possible without completely killing performance on other data.
2) Repeat the fine-tuning experiment but with training a model from scratch. More specifically, for a particular set of claims, remove all correct instances of that claim from the training data (preferably also all paraphrases, e.g. search the training data for everything that expresses 2+2=4 directly enough). Possibly also add a bunch of corresponding false claims. See how well a supervised probe trained on other simple true things does on this data.
3) Repeat the above but with more thorough removal of everything related to 2+2=4 — for instance, also remove all instances of $2\cdot 2=4$ (the idea here is that the model might otherwise learn a rule that connects x+x to 2x and know how to compute 2x).
4) Be even more thorough: keep a minimal amount so that the model should be able to connect the symbol "2" to the concept, and the symbol "+" to the concept, and should know that "x+y" is how addition is denoted, but all explicit examples of addition are removed from the training data, or are incorrect.

I also have an idea for a more analogous (to the GPT-AGI question we care about) version where we replace human data with a bunch of data generated by GPT-2s playing a game which would update me significantly more than any of this — I'll try to write that down later.


