
take clem's wave thing which is precise but can only be run at a small number of locations at each time. take a bunch of those readings while also doing MRI on a person. now train a model to predict the precise thing at a time from the previous MRI time series (actually, using the future measurements as well is even also fine!). if this worked, we could yeet precise scans into existence with ML magic?
* of course this is very unlikely to work. why does it fail (other than ykno nothing working in general)?
	* because the MRI is probably still way too far to be able to deduce the precise things from it? it does have many fewer bits per time slice sorta i guess, so maybe one can say it's just impossible — but then again, you can look at a bunch of times at once; but then again then again, you then also have many more underlying bits i guess (like, from more times), so maybe bit counting still suggests this shouldn't work? this info theory stuff is of course super weird in this kind of computational context
	* you might also need a pretty crazy amount of compute? what kind of spacetime resolution do we get from the precise method? how many data points do we need to even have a reasonable number of data points for each voxel?
	* also this probably totally fails when you've done some learning — now most of the shallow connections learned by ML between the shit data and the precise data FOR YOUR VERY PARTICULAR BRAIN AT ROUGHLY A PARTICULAR TIME are going to be no longer right, right?