
eg see some essays in reason, value, and reality by john mcdowell

we used to have weird notions of many things, and we seem to sometimes be okay about giving them up. for example, we used to have an intuitive notion of weight, i guess, and then we invented scales to measure weight, and now we are quite happy talking about weights defined in-such-and-such-a-way; we are quite happy saying that e.g. while an object seems light to me, it is actually heavy — we are quite happy abandoning some notion of weight in this case, it feels like. we don't seem to be as happy about this with colors; eg, we can say that a certain wall is red in certain lighting conditions even though we know it looks blue in usual conditions, has such-and-such reflective/emissive/absorptive properties, etc.. or maybe we are happy abandoning that also? we seem to be pretty okay with saying "while this wall appears red, i know it really isn't", i guess. why couldn't we do this kind of thing to goodness? or tastiness? i guess the worry is that this might leave us crippled?

note that i guess in no case would we be happy with a reduction to our attitudes, eg we would not be happy reducing redness to whether-something-seems-red-to-us (also, seems nontrivial to make that non-circular!), or whether reason leads us to think something is red, or whatever. it seems plausible that we would be similarly unhappy reducing goodness in this manner. we only seem to be happy with reductions to particular sensible world-things, or something. i guess we could try to reduce/replace goodness in this way — indeed, people have tried to do so, eg goodness = dopamine blabla. i guess the issue here is that goodness has a particular force on us, right, and the thing we replace it with might no longer have this force on us?

hmm, i guess we might be worried about reducing color to something about reflection wavelengths, also — eg suppose someone has ptsd from blood or something, so they really don't want to see red — for these contexts we might need the red-seeming concept? are we happy with reducing this to some vision cells activating? or some deeper brain algo activating? for this clinical sense, maybe we are happy with that, actually?

## could this be a paper?

it might be cool to think through abandoning our intuitive concept of redness, carefully considering all of the options as above, and then seeing how this contrasts with abandoning our intuitive notion of goodness. are the two really that analogous?

it seems plausible to me atm that we can abandon redness just fine, but then when we try to similarly abandon goodness, we run into trouble because the things we reduce it to might fail to motivate us in this way. like, for any 'more directly' physical property like dopamine-in-particular-kinds-of-systems integrated over space and time or whatever, we probably have issues — we can imagine cases where we wouldn't be motivated by that, actually! or at least, this is a very open problem. and when we go for something physical located in ourselves, like what i'd tell myself to do if i were wiser, we can clearly imagine this kind of thing going wrong — so that reduction doesn't seem safe either, doesn't retain the motivational power, or something.

however, goodness is also not something silly like 'what motivates us about an act', ie maybe something that takes an act and outputs what motivates us about it, because the goodness of an act should motivate us, but this map certainly doesn't motivate us. wait nvm this paragraph seems somewhat confused sorry!