
* let's say you're a computer program. maybe you're some sort of AI. maybe you're some sort of math AI
* now you could conceivably be run in many contexts/worlds. one can write down many programs which run you. if you're a math AI, you could in principle be used to solve the same problem in various universes
* i would like to know: what should your probabilities be that you are run in various contexts. like, what's your generalized born rule.
	* the obvious answer: well you're supposed to have some prior. maybe a simplicity prior in particular
	* the garrabrant answer: this is ultimately a question of what worlds you care about. this isn't ultimately about epistemics
* but maybe one can make progress this way: ok but there will be a fact of the matter of what you observed before. we would like to have a probability assignment process which assigns a high likelihood to what we've seen so far. eg this is mostly where the born probabilities come from, i guess
	* in particular, we could imagine a math AI successively unboxed into larger and larger universes, with each layer always properly screened off from the larger layer before the unboxing event. this way, you accumulate a sequence of observations about what universes you get unboxed into
* ok so if you are the math AI yourself, having obtained your observation sequence, you can try to think about what sort of prior it looks like stuff gets drawn from. but wtf do you do if you are looking at this whole shebang from the outside? like, from the outside, it's sort of just like there ARE all these possible reveal sequences, and we have no idea which one a math AI would observe? 
	* this is a classic issue also with making sense of born probabilities right. like there's just these fucking guys who see what we think of as a 1/3 2/3 quantum coin behave like a 1/2 1/2 coin!
	* in the quantum case you can try to get out of this by saying: ok but you can decompose the big superposition of all possible coinflip outcome sequences into an incredibly small L^2 norm part where the observation ratio is fucked plus a 1-eps L^2 norm part where the observation ratio is very close to correct. one response to this is: ok but why must you have tiny probability of being in the eps norm part? i guess we could say that's some sort of axiom, or maybe we could try to appeal to some sort of ambient noise that dominates that? anyway, i wonder if there's something analogous to this for our math AI unbox sequence case. 