
Suppose we aren't quite in a position to concretely specify the reasoning(/sentence-acceptance) process we are engaged in — for example, because sufficiently precise brain scans are not yet available — as we indeed aren't. Can we already construct a Gödel sentence for this process anyway?

Let's follow the steps of the usual construction of a Gödel sentence. First, we need an acceptance predicate for our reasoning. It seems like insofar as we can talk about things in our natural language at all, we can in particular talk about whether some claim $\varphi$ would become accepted by us in the future, or about whether some claim $\varphi$ would be accepted by an idealized version of us.[^1] Letting $\ulcorner\varphi\urcorner$ denote the string corresponding to the statement $\varphi$, we use $\mathrm{Prov}(\ulcorner \varphi\urcorner)$ as an abbreviation of a natural-language statement like that (well, it only stands for one particular one, but let's not commit ourselves to one at this point). Now let $\phi(x)$ denote the natural-language statement 'x encodes a valid statement in natural language with one free string-type variable; furthermore, denoting this statement $\chi$, we have $\neg \Box \left(\ulcorner\chi (x)\urcorner\right)$'. We now define our natural-language Gödel sentence to be $G=\phi(\ulcorner\phi\urcorner)$. Now, as usual, one can provide a natural-language argument in natural language that $G\iff \neg \Box (\ulcorner G\urcorner)$.[^2]

From the above, it looks tentatively plausible that a Gödel sentence for natural reasoning could be constructed in natural language. However, there are other sentences in natural language which seem similar to the sentence constructed above but which must fail to be part of a language in which reasonable reasoning could be performed — for example, "This sentence is false.", ""yields falsehood when preceded by its quotation" yields falsehood when preceded by its quotation", or "If this sentence is true, then Santa Claus exists.". The similarity of the sentence $G$ constructed above to these sentences provides some reason to doubt that $G$ is legitimate. That said, the very fact that $G$ has a legitimate analogous sentence in a formal language whereas these other similar-seeming sentences fail to have legitimate analogous sentences in a formal language provides some reason to think that $G$ is legitimate despite these other similar-seeming sentences not being legitimate. These considerations make it seem likely to us that $G$ is legitimate after all. Still, sufficient doubt remains that a more precise treatment seems warranted to us. We provide such a treatment in the next section.

[^1]: Ok, this second sentence making sense probably depends on counterfactual-talk making sense, which is perhaps one of the more suspect fragments of natural language; but even with this taken into account, it still seems intuitively more plausible than not that the sentence makes sense. Note also that as opposed to say, talking about truth, which is potentially philosophically suspect, these statements can be made out to be about something fairly mechanical — they're close to being about what a particular process in the world to which we can point will 'output'.
[^2]: meta: we probably want to fill in the details here
