
see: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/24-242-logic-ii-spring-2004/6f9412cac1745eab23b326493be754fc_2nd_incompletens.pdf

Suppose you are put in a room with a screen on which various numbers can be shown (according to some rules — maybe you get to ask for a next number when you are done contemplating this one). All you will do is thinking really hard about what mathematical statements are true and writing down statements you have come to accept in a list. Maybe we want to let you browse the list and also give you access to a memory tape? But I guess the screen, list, and tape should be all your inputs, and the list and tape (and maybe screen controls) should be all your outputs? I guess you need to have your metabolism maintained somehow and we might need to do some surgery to make sure these are your only inputs and outputs, but maybe let's assume you have been uploaded such that these things are easy. 

Before you are put in this room, you are told also that whenever you ask the screen to print a number, it gives your source code and your program state (maybe together with the contents of your memory tape and your already-accepted-statement-list) just before seeing that number. You could now write into your accept-list the statement 'such-and-such-a-process will never come to accept 0=1', or 'for all strings x, if such-and-such-a-process would come to accept x, then x'. Suppose you are the kind of process that does in fact write that into their accept-list. You will then, if you're the kind of process that eventually thinks about all kinds of stuff — let's say that you are — at some point write a statement $G$ equivalent to 'such-and-such-a-process will never come to accept $G$'. You can then realize also that if 'such-and-such-a-process will come to accept $G$' were true, it would follow that 'such-and-such-a-process will come to accept that such-and-such-a-process will never come to accept $G$' because it could chain it with the equivalence given, but also that 'such-and-such-a-process will come to accept that such-and-such-a-process will come to accept $G$' (box P implies box box P). Given that you have written 'such-and-such-a-process will never come to accept 0=1', you can conclude that 'such-and-such-a-process will come to accept $G$' cannot be true (since the process would then come to accept Q and also not Q, in contradiction with it not coming to accept 0=1). You thus conclude that 'such-and-such-a-process will not come to accept $G$'. But you then chain with the given equivalence to conclude $G$. You can also put a box on this (if proves P then proves box P), i.e., you will also thus come to accept that 'such-and-such-a-process will come to accept $G$'. And you've then proved Q and not Q, so you've proved 0=1.

We might make this simpler if we just give the number at the beginning? Yea seems better. Anyway, I think this roughly works: you really can't believe yourself to be consistent in this sense. Let's also write down an argument like this for the case where you start off accepting the universally quantified Löb sentence? Well, there's no need — just use it for a falsehood to get the consistency sentence. Though it could be cool to consider variants where you accept it only for particular sentences also?

I guess we can imagine versions of this for what you could prove instead (if you take quantum stuff or randomness or something to be important here)? Like, make the statement about everything you could come to accept, and the argument probably still works?

Now, suppose you are the kind of guy that, when told a specification of what kind of careful reasoning system you are implementing, will also come to accept that the stuff you can come to accept does not include 0=1. Concretely, we could flash on the screen a number that specifies a process enumerating all the statements you would come to accept, under arbitrary  (though not necessarily )