
n ppl (considering) building a house together. for each subset of ppl, know how valuable the house would be if just this subset participated. how much money to give to person i? the shapley answer: the expectation when taking a uniform permutation of people of how much house-value gets added when person i is included. eg n=3, i=1, then the permutation 213 would 'say 1 contributed' v(21)-v(2) (and we take the expectation over all 6 permutations)

why principled: this is the unique thing satisfying some axioms. the key one i guess is that the values assigned to people should just be added when we make the subset do two independent projects. ie when you add two value functions, the contribution of i should also just be summed. the second is that if you have a project where k<=n just people matter together — no value is produced except if they are all present and if they are all present then value x is produced regardless of who else joins — then the credit each get should be x/k (one can justify this further from symmetry considerations (axioms) if one wants). these two things together give at most one answer because we can build any value function as a sum of these subset indicator things (the reason is that you can go from smallest to biggest, fixing the vals at larger sets. related: this being a basis, inclusion-exclusion, möbius functions). so these two things imply some unique value function. and it is easy to see that the proposed definition indeed satisfies these axioms. ie the shapley answer is uniquely pinned down by these axioms!