
we have a language (eg of common-sense physics), which we know to be inadequate/incoherent (eg it talks of simultaneity without reference to a particular frame). We still want to assign probabilities to sentences in this language, e.g. maybe to 'computationalism is basically right' in our current (as of 2024) philosophical language. One option would be to treat every sentence as implicitly ANDing the entire background framework always, but this leads to just assigning probability $0$ to everything — in particular, for each sentence, to both it and to its 'naive negation' in the language — which seems useless. So in some sense we want these probabilities assigned to sentences not to capture our real probabilities that these sentences are in the most literal sense saying something ultimately true, because in the most literal sense we know they are saying something false. (I hope I can get away with not really saying precisely what I mean by 'the most literal sense' here — I hope it's sort of clear what I mean.) But what do we want them to capture? One answer is that we're just playing some prediction game, so shut up and keep playing with your inadequate conceptions or something, but surely we can say more about what they're supposed to capture

some sub/[related ]topics
* could this distinction help make sense of objections to high probabilities in messy domains (e.g. saying one shouldn't have 99% on computationalism) — maybe these objections are sometimes thinking of a statement as sorta having this big AND over the framework?
* we can poke holes in any statement by showing the words it uses to be fucked (e.g. 'unless a very strong governance scheme is put in place, ai will go from human-level to crazy very quickly'). since this kind of thing can be done for any sentence (well, especially when speaking about stuff we are confused about), we should tread carefully when taking these holes as evidence against the statement in a context where the background framework remains fixed. 
* we should be careful about proofs by contradiction for the naive negation of a statement, because they might start from assuming the negation of a statement but really involve subverting the background framework to reach a contradiction, and there's a chance such an argument could equally be provided starting from the statement itself. maybe this is some argument in favor of trusting 'constructive' reasoning more than 'non-constructive' reasoning, at least in messy domains
* i sorta have the intuition that updating as bayes naively dictates is too strong in this messy case. e.g., you thought about stuff a bunch, reached the conclusion that p(doom) is 70%, then someone points out an experimental result that should update you 2:1 that you hadn't considered yet. maybe this is just the clever reasoner issue, not sth about it being reasonable to update softly? ok, but imagine a case where you just realize it. it maybe feels like the likelihood ratio is 2:1, but also maybe you've had lots of similarly informative realizations in either direction in the past, and like the 70% was some vague aggregate of all this anyway, and you feel like if you were being this precise with all your updates, you'd probably be at like <0.0001% or 99.999%, so most of the time you must not be updating like that, and so why should you be updating like that now. yea i guess i'm reasonably convinced at this point something softer should be going on.
* another example where this feels plausible: you previously were pretty uncertain about whether to work on interp or agent foundations, say. then u realize something is quite wrong with interp. then a bayesian would be like: ok, u just have to do agent foundations now. but is this really right? is this sorta taking your prior epistemic state overly seriously?

## a connection with the bio olympiad maxim (actually probably not seriously taken to be good idea, more like an attempt at a silly thing)

any useful conception must take some universally quantified 'positive' statements to be true (and some existentially quantified negations of 'positive statements' to be true), but the biology olympiad maxim says all of these are always really false when one can make terms more precise. so any basically imprecise conception must let you consider-true individual sentences which are false even without being conceived of as having an AND of all the stuff assumed in the conception as a constituent